20

B

ba (ar) a flower; to flower; to adorn, e.g. the hair, with a flower; a hair ornament (made of e.g. gold or silver); refl. to adorn oneself with a flower; to observe the ba porob.

*ba basi - the day after the ba feast *ba chandu: - the month (about March) when the sal (sarjom) out trees blossom and the ba feast is observed.

*ba dumbu- a tall grass with stems divided into very fine segments.

(also called tuka, q.v.)

*ba guri: - the day before the ba feast, on which day the women clean the house and courtyard with guri: (wet cowdung); refl. - to observe the customs of the day before the ba feast.

*ba jono: a tall grass having brown hairy spikelets. It is used for making brooms. Sorghum nitidum, Pers., Gramineae. H.139/70/3,

B.139/43

*ba kubi - cauliflower *ba leper a: a type of leper

a: (q.v.), prob. Amarantus paniculatus and/or caudatus, L. Amarantaceae. H.108/5/2-3

*ba porob- the annual flower feast celebrated at the time when the flowers of the sal (sarjom) tree blossom

*ba sabon-bathing soap *ba sunum - sweet-scented oil

*ba tasad- same as ba dumbu *ba-uru- a kind of black beetle that

frequents flowers.

-ba- a verbal affix - here and there, now and then (Les.27) ba: (4) to scratch (of a small scratch, e.g. as caused by a thorn, for a longer, deeper scratch howar is used)

*ba:-boga: - to scratch causing to split open and the contents to come

ba: (a) to fasten, hook e.g. a door latch; a latch, hook; to catch, cut down (e.g. fruit) by means of a hook fitted onto a stick or by a hooked *ba gitil- afterbirth, the placenta branch. (in this last sense baku: is also used)

*ba:-kesed to block by latching, e.g. a door with a chain

*ba:-kur- to latch someone inside.

a room

baba (a) the paddy (rice) plant; unthreshed paddy stalks; threshed unhusked paddy grains; some times used for paddy personified as in the term baba keya-ura, see

also baba enga, babako *baba ata puffed rice

*baba ba - the tiny white flower of

the paddy plant *baba-biti - a collective noun for

worldly goods.

*baba bonga-ura - another name for kolom bonga-ura, q.v.

*baba enga a personification of the original source (mother) from which all paddy has come, invoked e.g. on the her-mut feast to ask spardon for any disrespect shown to rice grains and to seek her protection on the growing paddy crop.

21

*baba-gosari to sift with one's fingers broken bits of straw from newly threshed paddy grains in

refer to the whole process of baba

tar, q.v. Hogy new *baba tar the work of spreading out paddy sheaves and having sowing the main paddy crop, about cattle thresh them by walking on

*baba her chandu:- the month for

May or June() mabad

*baba her mut(u) same as her

them. (see tär)

*baba tela-ura- a rite in which rice bad grains are put into the hand of a dead person and received from his or her hand into the hands of *baba jan - a paddy seedabid living members of the family

mut(u), q.v.

*baba her tunki a basket used exclusively for sowing paddy seeds

*baba kara- a small plank, about one and a half feet long, fastened to a pole, used for pulling back together paddy which has been spread out (e.g. in threshing)

*babako rice grains personified as though offspring of the baba enga, q.v. (used in certain prayers) *baba lete: - by chewing to husk rice grains (spitting out the husk and eating the grain) mub

*baba marchi - a small but very pungent chilli, Capsicum annuum, L., var. abbreviata, Fingerh., Solanaceae, B.97/1, H.97/4/1. Medicine is prepared from this for

sick buffaloes and cattle.rated *baba mut(u) same as her

mut(u), q.v. Abel ua tatla

*baba para paddy grown in a nursery for later transplanting.

*baba-pete - empty paddy grains *baba rosa a small projection

from the end of a paddy grain.

*baba sar bonga a spirit who the rice supply of his/ her devotee, red

*baba sara used in prayers for baba jań, paddy seeds.

*baba sin-straw (also called busu) *baba sokoe: to throw down unthreshed paddy stalks for threshing; sometimes used to

*baba tiki - the process of boiling paddy grains in water for the purpose of husking.indd

*baba-tiki chatu an earthen pot used for boiling the paddy for husking. (This may be used for such purposes as boiling clothes, e.g. on the occasion of niyar-era: [purification after a birth] but it

may not be used for cooking the family meal). (1) bad

*baba-tupu chatu: same as baba-tiki chatu:

baba father (used by children or in affection; the ordinary term for

father is apu)

babar, babar (RR)- two each ba-baro (a) two by two (of

men or animals)

babata (c) to itch (Les. 26) babo (at) to win someone over

to one's viewpoint or purpose; to win around e.g. someone who is angry or pouting

babu (a) a boy, a young man (used when addressing him).

ba-bu(tan) (ar-a) to look here and there e.g. when lost or when look ing for something (with verb med, nel)

babur (a) daru another name for the uruba tree, the acacia tree, prob. Acacia arabica, Willd., Mimosaceae, B.55/1, H.55/9/2

22

bachara (R)- a white, intestinal worm (prob. The pin worm or seat worm). E.M. gives "about 3 inches long, found in man, fowl and cattle, esp. in buffaloes". (For the large intestinal round worm Hos use lendad)

bachaw (aaa) to save (Hindi bachana). This form rather than the more common form banchaw is sometimes used of a particular act of saving someone from some harm, (same as Ho hardu:), rather than in the broader sense of saving e.g. from sin.

bachur chora ( बचुर चोरा) a hill in Orissa named in prayers.

bad (a) after (a Hindi word sometimes used in Ho, e.g. in the expression en bad; proper Ho would be en chanab)

bad (3) certainly, by all means; to demand (e.g. of a girl before going for her marriage, to hold on to the feet of a relative until she is given a going-away gift); of a dewa, etc. to put a curse on someone; refl. baden - to put a curse on oneself, e.g. gojo:kań mente: badentanae:, 'She curses herself to die'

*bad-bapad to insist (in asking,

giving, etc)

*bad-duku(te) with great diffi- culty

*badte with difficulty (e.g. because of some physical weakness, etc., or because very much against one's wishes) bad-bed (a-3) the cries of many goats or sheep.

bada (4) partially ripe, e.g. of a fruit

badabadi (af) - competition (e.g. in dancing, singing)

bada-budu (-)- for the whole lower part of the plough to enter into the soil as one ploughs (when the field is soft and well soaked, cf. budu-budu) ve

badam (a) a peanut (short form of chinabadam) on and

badara (3) a flying foxffin

badara (3) a long dragnet for catching fish. 101 visururinese

badchom (as) - sabai grass, used to make ropes for beds, etc. Pollinidium angustifolium, Gramineae, B. 139/34, H.139/61/1

*badchom bayer rope made of badchomade of badi (af) a strip of silk-cocoon

that has been cut to the proper thickness to tie an arrowhead to the arrow; to tie with such a strip; the leather strips used to span drums; poetic parallel of juri, a mate or companion, used in a marriage song; refl. badin - to strongly commit (tie) oneself to some action (Sometimes the double term badintanae, tolentanae: is used for this)

badi (af) used in prayers par allel to ladi, or in the jingle ladi badi with the meaning of ladi, "to load upon'

badi (af) used in prayers parallel to hisa, or to hisa-chenţa with the meaning 'to harass'.

badi (af) - poetic parallel of piri, a field. exhau

badowa: (a) a large full beard badu (a) an antelope (E.M. - the Sasin or Indian antelope)

baduri (af) a bat, a small flying fox (cf. badara) ded

*baduri jalom - a net for catching baduri asmi

23

bãe (v) the initial thin strip them on people. They also make noises to scare people in the

made when making a jați (a palm mat); to prepare such an initial jungle. strip

someone his share. *baga-bakara- a share

*bagiya bonga - same as bagiya. baga (1) a share; to give bagiya (af) a reddish brown vd colour, a mixture of ara: (reddish brown) and kasae (a deeper reddish brown), sometimes used of the colour of tigers, goats,

bagaiti (amsta) the condition of being under threat of serious (even lethal) harm caused by either a) etc. the witchcraft (bai, banai) of another, or b) by one's having displeased the bagiya (q.v.) spirits of the jungle; pass. verb- to be in such a condition (a sign of this is sometimes that tiger hair (kula iyal or kula dariya) is found in *bagra chauli husked rice of one's rice, or that the colour of one's rice has become reddish) d

different varieties mixed together. bagur(ken) (a) of leaves, bagan (3) a garden (also bakai) vegetables, etc., to grow in abundance, big and close to one-another.

bagara (3) - see bagra) bagasa (a) - a boxid his

bage (a) to leave, abandon, *bagur-bagur - same as bagur(ken) relinquish; refl. to dissociate oneself or take oneself away from a person or situation (e.g. a woman leaving her husband or a dasi leaving his work), also in refl. we can say kaji kae: bagentana, 'he *baguri-ö:1- to separate from the doesn't stop talking' *bage-atu- to leave behind

*bage-era: - to abandon or desert; to neglect (e.g. a parent not taking proper care of his or her child); refl.

- to neglect (not care for) oneself;

to deny oneself.

*bage-goe: to let die through molox of lolla

neglect.

*bagekete besides, e.g. neya bagekete, 'besides this'. AP

bagiya (बगिया) - the shade of a person killed by a tiger. The bagiya spirits are believed to control the jungle tigers and sometimes inflict

bagol (are) verbal affix - suddenly (alternate form of bangol)

bagra (3) mixed, of seeds not all of the same variety; to be a mixture of many colours (with ka 'not', this can mean 'pure white')

bagur (a) daru an alternate name for the tree more commonly called babur,q.v.

baguri (af) to separate from the flock or herd.

flock or herd.oose

baguru (3) to finish celebrat ing some feast (i.e. stop dancing, etc., after celebrating it for 3 days or so) to the dodo

bai () to make; the refl. form bain is sometimes used in the sense of 'become'; to inflict harm by witchcraft (see separate entry

below)) owth a *bai-joka to make and keep in

readiness

*bai-muli- to make straight

(e.g. fields)

*bai-sangi to make numerous audind

24

*bai-seka - to complete making refers to the whole town and not *bai-tãe: to skip or leave out

just to the market place, which is something while making.in called hat(o). bajara (aus) -a drum beat on the

*bai-tiyar- to make ready. *bai-ura- to make again; to repair side by Ghasis, etc., but not used *baiyo:- (passive participial form) by Hos. with whom something is allowed, e.g. one with whom one has a joking relationship and therefore one with whom one could dance, etc. Micund

bajaw (au) to be a certain time (Hindi - bajna "to strike") Chimin bajawo:tana?, 'What time is it?" (Hos when telling time always use Hindi.)

bai (s)- to inflict harm esp. death on someone by witchcraft.

*bai-adani:- one who knows how to inflict harm by witchcraft; a

wizard.

*bai-goe: - to kill by witchcraft. *bai-sid to kill off a family by witchcraft. (22) (05) Brynd

bai (as) daru- the banyan tree; Ficus bengalensis, L., Moraceae, B.125/4. H.125/8/13

baid (ass) at least (see bayed) baisak (as) a month; the last half of April and the first half of May dad halls

baisika (af) a swelling of the lymphatic gland in the groin, e.g. parallel to dili-giti:, q.v. salval consequent to an infection in the leg or foot; pass. - to develop such a swelling. (and

baja (a) to support something loosely by tying around with a baka-biyun (a-fags) of the rope, used esp. of the early stages of preparing a rice bandi.

*baja-bayer - a rope used for the bakai ( बकाइ) - enclosure, early stages of supporting paddy to be stored in a bandi, (not the large straw-rope (bor) used on the outside of a bandi) mlocind *bakai-dr- the site of one's garden

an

baja (a) a musical instrument of any kind (from Hindi)mad

bajar (a) a town, a city, e.g. Chaibasa, Chakradharpur. This

baji (af) - a bet; to bet ontona

bajigar (af) - a gypsy; a nomadic salesman traveling from place to place with his family selling na girls on objects. o dd nomizoton

bajila (af) to be overturned, e.g. a truck; to turn head over heels. baju (au) an ornament for the upper part of the arm.

baka (a) a joyous sound of certain birds, e.g. the common maina; a laughing sound made by babies; to make such sounds; used as poetic parallel to dili, 'to set a date', 'to invite'

*baka-giti: used in prayers

*baka-inun to pass one's time enjoyably (while away one's time) making a sound as given under baka.bitede fed

head, to spin; to be dizzy (same as biyun-biyun) to) son of

garden; to fence in; used in prayers parallel to kolom, a threshing floor' with that meaning. gad

*bakai-kesed- to fence in.ed bakara (T) daru - the 'baer' tree; Zizyphus jujuba, Lamk., Rhamnaceae, B.46/2; H.46/21

*bakara lungam silkworm

25

marriage; refl. - to become related through marriage. *bala-era the mother of one's

cultivated on the bakara daru. bakara (as) same as bakā bakara (is) same as baka son's wife or daughter's husband.

bakara-biyun (s-fage)- a small brown beetle found in water. Often 4 or 5 of these are seen playfully swimming close together. bakari (as) poetic form for

bakai, 'garden'

bakasa (a) -

bagasa)

a box

bakaw (aaa) - to incite

(also

bakor (बकोर) a thin growth marriage. running down the neck of a cock; bearded from ear to ear (not just

on the chin); of the beak of a parrot, curved, hooked baku: (a) to catch or cut with a

hooked object (e.g. a branch) *baku:-0:1- to take out by catching with a hooked object

bakud (3)- to crawl with the centre successively arching and leveling out, e.g. of leeches, caterpillars.

bal (c) to burn a hole into e.g. a flute; poetical parallel of lo, to burn *bal-enda: poetic parallel of

lo-enda:, same as bal-era:,q.v.

*bal-era: - to burn out; to drive out by burning; to touch someone with a heated object (e.g. with a chatom kata, an umbrella rib) in order to neutralize the effects of an evil spirit, e.g. a data bonga or bagiya bonga

bal (ata) flood, to flood *bal da: - flood water.

bala a parent of one's son-in law or daughter-in-law; to treat someone as a bala showing proper hospitality, etc.

*bala-bundu - relations through

*balakin the parents of one's son's wife or daughter's husband. *balako those who go to the house of a girl or boy to arrange a marriage (e.g. who go for the bapala, or the gonon har)

*bala-saka prospective relations through marriage; pass. - to become relations through

*balatadi: - same as bala, used for

vocative. *balataḍko same as balako

bala-balu (-)- mad. rabid (of dogs); delirious (of men); to very

badly confuse someone. *bala-balu-chaba to utterly

confuse someone,

bala da: - poetic parallel of had da:, the first pre-monsoon rains.

balae (ay) suffering, to suffer hardships. (This is a more common word in Mundari, but in Ho, at least near Chaibasa, it is used only in terms such as halae-balae used in songs. See also hae-bae)

balai (as) good works done for others; to do good to others.

bala-jiga (-)- a form of rental in which one man uses his own cattle, implements, and labour to cultivate another man's land and

takes half the crop in return. balatin (af) - long lasting, long lived.

balaya (a) the relationship be tween mutual parents-in-laws; of mutual parents-in-law, to share some activity. banece old

*balaya-malaya - a jingle on

balaya

26

balbal (4) to perspire (Les.26) *balbal da: - perspiration *balbal-lum to make wet with

perspiration; pass. to so become

wet.

bale () hair, the string of a banam (fiddle)

bale (a) a trap made of thread, horse hair, rope, wire, etc.;a snare (for birds, etc.); to entrap, to ensnare; to fish with a line and hook; to draw water out of a well with e.g. a bucket on a rope.

*bale chari: - a bird trap made of thin bamboo strips (chari:)

*bale-o:1- to draw out (e.g. water from a well with a bucket)

*bale: sagen oe - a small bird which makes its appearance at the time when new tender leaves blossom.

*bale: sakam tender freshly blossomed leaves.

*bale seped a boy in early

adolescence (13-16 years old)

*bale: singi - the newly risen sun *bale: sitiya - an infant

*bale:-ura to become fresh or tender again; of flesh, to form again after a wound has healed.

Balisor (बलिसो र) Balasore, adj. from or considered to be from Balasore.

baliya (af) the colour of a hen, *bale-urui: - to entrap tightly two shades of red and some white

bale: (a) young; early; fresh, tender (in some cases the check of this word is dropped, see usages given below); infancy, e.g. bale:re, in infancy (for which bale:yakanre can also be used), bale: (or nickname of a girl; pass. verb - to become fresh or tender; of fresh flesh, to form again after a wound has healed, jilu bale: yakana, 'flesh has formed freshly' (after a wound) Castela *balu mui: a small black ant

mixed. balok (at) - a child, childhood

(used in songs. Hindi - balak') balsa (c) - balsam, an aromatic, commonly oily and resinous, substance flowing from certain

bale:mai) is sometimes used as the plants.

balti (f) a bucket (Hindi) balu () a bear (also bana)

*balu gota: - a term used in some places for the Sirkeer Cuckoo (elsewhere called ke: berlo:)

found in fields and trees, does not bite (as do e.g. the rola mui: and the had mui:)

*balu surpan - a hornet (blackish and rather big)

bamal (a) a kind of rash. bamal (44) lost, esp. of cattle, (goats, etc.

*bale hapanum - a girl in early adolescence (13-16 yrs. old)

*bale: hon an infant *bale: hopad- a fresh offshoot

*bale: iyal-the fine downy hair of

a baby

*bale: mai- a nickname sometimes given to a girl.

*bale mulu: the second or third day after a new moon.tum

*bale: sagen tender leaves blossoming on twigs after the cold season is over.

bamali (H)-one who has left his village and roams from place to

place (used near Noamundi) Bamara (HST) - the Bamra section of Orissa

27

bambud (3) tasteless (used in expressions such as bambudge jomo:wa); few-seeded, unde veloped, and therefore tasteless, varieties of fruits (such as figs of the ai daru) which in the properly developed varieties are seeded and tasty. bame () a Brahmin tou

Bamonati (af) a place used of bamboo in prayers along with Dalbun and Kuchun. The site of a former small princely state in Orissa East of the Majhgaon area of Singhbhum

ban, ban negative of the verb to be when denoting presence or existence. This gives the forms bano:wa 'it is absent', 'there is none', banina, 'I am absent', ban-meya, "you (sg.) are absent', etc. (See Les. 18 for forms and

usage)

ban (ar) by mantras etc. to inflict harm or injury on someone (see bara); the act of thus

inflicting harm *ban-choron - inflicting harm or

injury through mantras, etc. ban (3) father (when address-

ing him, used more toward the North); big brother (so used near ubned

Noamundi) bana () a bear

*bana naki: janum a large kakarambad) bushlike creeper (perhaps same as

bana raba: nai) *bana raba: nai- a rambling bush,

in appearance somewhat like the karkața tree, used as a medicine baku:) for wounds inflicted by bears or tigers.

bana (a) an excuse; to make an excuse.

bana: () a hooking up, some thing used in hooking up (verbal noun of ba:)

*bana: daru - same as bana: koto *bana: koto - a branch with a hook at one end and leaves at the other end used e.g. for transferring silkworm from one tree to another. *bana: lauți - a long hooked piece

banai (3) harm, (sickness, death) inflicted on someone by witchcraft (verbal noun of bai); while asking the aid of some spirit to make and bury a symbol representing some harm which one wishes that spirit should inflict on someone (e.g. the head of a chicken to indicate that one wishes the death of that person)

*banai bonga- any spirit through whose mediation a banai is cast (not a specific bonga); a sacrificial rite in which the effect of a banai is neutralized.

*banai utaw of a dewa, etc., to take up from the place where it is buried a symbol representing harm intended to be inflicted on another (this is done to neutralize the effect of the banai)

bana-jiyan (a-forus) a big cha Condmeleon-type tree-lizard (also called jan jan donda. See also

banaku: () - a piece of branch and side branch so cut as to form a hook, e.g. used to break off fruit from a tree (verbal noun of

banam (a) a village type fiddle *banam gandu the small moveable piece of wood which supports the string of a fiddle.m

28

ban-bon (az-ate) to make a wide gaping hole, e.g. in an embankment. ban-bun (3-3) a loud buzzing

sound of several bees (nili), large flies, etc. when disturbed banchaw (a)- salvation, to save.

opposing *banchawon danarom - a shield

banda (d) a tank, pond *banda bonga- a spirit remaining

in a tank banda (3) - uncastrated male, used perhaps only with sukuri,

'pig'

bandar (R) a form of mortgage in which interest must also be paid to regain the mortgaged object (compare tika); in the case through of mortgaging a field, the use of the field serves as interest, and the mortgage runs until the capital is repaid in full. bandasa-bundusu (-) English)

- to feel heavy, lazy (e.g. after a heavy meal); to be an idler. bandela (a) a pond, tank (used

with pukuri)

bandiya (cs) having something severed; esp used (with or without chadlom) for tailless; sometimes in songs and prayers in parallel used of a man with some limb, e.g. a finger, or a part of a finger, cut

bandi (f)- a rice bundle; to make off. a rice bundle; when bandi is used of something offered to a spirit, it bão:) refers to a small amount of chaff wrapped in a bundle with straw rope so as to resemble a bandi.

*bandi-baba- a collective noun for one's wealth in stored paddy; sometimes esp. in prayers used for bandi

*bandi-bayer- the outer rope with which a rice bundle is tied (i.e. outside the bor) This usually is made of ipil or badchom rope, but

if these cannot be gotten, twisted strands of straw (called joto) are used.

*bandi-or to haul a bandi e.g.. from a kolom to the place where it will be stored (usually done in a bullock cart dragged by men).

*banchaw-darom -to save by *bandi sonoro: another name for the goja, a pointed stick used for beating down paddy when putting it into a bandi

bandi sonoro: goja as under bandi sonoro:; the guisa fish (so called in jest)

*bandi tam gorau - a club used for beating paddy down tightly into a bandi when making the bandi; the

magura fish (in jest)

bandi: (af) to sever, cut clean

*bandi:-bara - to cut through into

two equal parts. bandil (af) a bundle, e.g. of leaves or of money, (prob. from

bando (at) a wild cat (also

bandu (a) nai a very heavy woody climber of the jungle, which yields a good fibre for ropes; Spatholobus roxburghii, Benth., Papilionaceae, E.M., B.53/104, H.53/45/4 under name butea parviflora

*bandu bayer - fibre or twine con sisting of strips of bandu nai bandul (age) - with bushy tail waving, e.g. of a jackal

29

*bandul-bandul - same as bandul (of a repetitive action)

married for many years but is childless

bandur-basu: (-a) having *banji era a barren woman very fine smooth hairs, e.g. of the hairs (iyal) of the mindi chidu or ote leper a:, q.v. of the tail of a jackal (one could say banji (af) to collect (esp. from the aya: chadlom bandur-basu:tana, or jungle) and bring in great quantity; bandur-basu:tane: chadlomana) used as verbal affix or poetic

*banji leper a: another name for

-banga (-) bangol, q.v.

same

as

banga-bungu (-) to have frequently used is gaya) white stripes or circular designs (dots) on e.g. a sari; to have such markings on one's flesh, e.g. because of sitting near a fire for some time.

bangala (बंगाला) = a bungalow, residence (Hindi, heard in Ho) bangara (RI) to have white patches on one's skin.

*bangara-bunguru to have thin stripes or markings of a white or light colour on a darker surface (for bigger broader markings the word *banki-ura of an object falling banga-bungu, q.v., would be used) from a height, to get caught in bangaw (a) to break off an engagement which has been branch fully made, e.g. for a marriage; to banki buru- a hill referred to in a finish something off. silkworm cultivation story.

-bangol (-) a verbal affix - suddenly, immediately red

banguru (5) of goats, cows, some small insects, to be a mixture of white with some dark (brown or black) colour; of men, to have some dark patches from sitting near a fire. giphy orska20

banguwa (a) - naked bāni (af) - a large circular feeding trough for cattle made of stone or cement. fwynene

being married for many years) *banji bura - a man who has been

jego spirite

parallel with tali, q.v. banjolo (aet) a eunuch (more

banka (a) crooked, e.g. a stick *banka-bunku crooked, e.g. a stick; winding, e.g. a road (such as

the Tebo Ghat) *banka buru a hill named in

prayers.

banki (af) a slightly curved iron instrument used for cutting shrubs, etc. (also called bankiya) banki (af) to get caught in some elevated place, e.g. a blunted arrow in a tree branch.

some elevated place, e.g. a tree

bankira (af) a kind of curved shape of the blade (kati) tied to the spur of a cock for cock-fighting bankira bonga- a spirit to which sacrifices are made in connection with silkworm breeding.bostad

bankiya (af) a slightly curved iron instrument used for cutting shrubs, etc (also called banki)

bankiya bonga - same as bankira bonga andtors gomana

bankura:/bankura (s/s) banji (af) -barren (childless after curved e.g. of the handle of an umbrella, of horns of cattle pon bankuri (af) a story end

30

and bano:tenko (pl), e.g. poysa bano:tenko, 'people without

bano ()- a particle translated by "is/are not', indicating that there is not an identity, e.g. ini: aña: money'. hondo bano, he is not my child' (Les.18); used in phrases indicating one or other (a disjunction), e.g. musiń bano musin, 'some day or other', mido bano mido, 'someone or other', banredo (a) otherwise (also

bano:wa (r) it/they (inani mate) is/are not present or does/ do not exist (Les. 18). This can be used in the form bano:wakana, 'it no longer exists'

karedo)

banremate (R) otherwise (an

alternate form to banredo) bão: (a) - a wildcat (also spelled

bawo:/बा'बो: )

bapad (3) to mutually exact (e.g. some small token gifts as a pledge to marry one another); to compete with one another; to be obstinate in annoying someone (recip. of bad); verbal affix, by all means, certainly (Les.27)

jai: bano jai:, 'someone or other', chikana: bano chikana:, 'something or other' okonta: bano okonta: 'somewhere or other' bano: () participial form of bano:wa, q.v. (bano:wa minus mood marker -a), occurring esp. in the meaning of 'not having (something inanimate), e.g. jomeya: bano: sepedko, 'young men having no food', asora bano: hatu, 'a village in which one has no relatives' (In these cases when the noun following bano: is animate, the alternate form bano:ten can be used, e.g. jomeya bano:ten

*bano: owa: a destitute family (house)

owa: bano:ten (a) an adjectival form modifying an animate noun and meaning 'not possessing' some inanimate object which is expressed previous to the word bano:ten, e.g. jomeya: bano:ten honko, children having no food, ote-hasa bano:ten höko, 'landless people'. If no object is expressed previous to bano:ten, it would mean 'possessing nothing', 'desti- *bapala andi- a properly arranged tute' e.g. bano:ten hōko, 'destitute men'. From the form bano:ten noun forms can be formed, bano:tini: (sg.), bano-tenking (dl.)

bapai (as) to be on good terms with one another; to get along with one another (recip. of bai). This is frequently used in the negative of people who do not get along together. Also note the phrase kaji kako bapaiyo:wa, 'they do *bano: owa:-duwar-same as bano: not agree on the matter'; to mutually inflict harm through witchcraft.

sepēḍko)

bapal (a) ote - used as poetical parallel with sal ote, low lying fields xima ed of

bapala (c) - to make preliminary arrangements for a marriage; the activities and feast on that occasion (recip. of bala); see gonon har bapala and gonon sid bapala

marriage (with a bapala etc,), as distinct from an elopement. yd

bapari gore (au)- an exclama tion of grief.

31

bapui (ays) unfortunate bar () two (short form) *bar-hisi ma-40 days, Lent

*bar-ji pass. to be pregnant (two-souled)

*baro- two people

*bar owa: two houses; for a woman to be the wife of a man who has two wives (even if there are not two separate houses), used in such expressions as bar owa:te mena:ya, 'she is the wife of a man who has two wives'

*barpa chadchomani: an elephant ('one having a tail on both

ends' said in jest) *barsa- twice (more commonly bar

duna is used)

*barsin-two days, used in express ne barsin, nowadays (these two days)

*bar-tuku - of two woman, to work together husking rice, e.g. bar-tukuitanakin, 'the two of them are alternately husking rice

together'

bar (3) day of the week (since all days end in bar), used in such expressions as:

*okon bar- which day of the week? en bar that day of the week.

bar (ar) verbal affix of some action (expressed in the first root), to take place in great numbers at the same time, e.g. of numerous fruits ripening at the same time (mata-bar), of numerous people harvesting at the same time (ir-bar), with the root ham (old man) it means to be in ripe old age. bar (a) outside; to put outside

*bär-pa - outside; a bowel movement (bir-pa is also used for this), to have a bowel movement.

bär ('s) an alternate form of bara, q.v.

-bara (-a) a verbal affix, to divide something into two approximately equal parts; with words such as buta or koto in prayers, to divide off forming new stalks or branches. jo

bara (a) a big male pig bara (3) poetic form of ba, a

flower

bara (as) by mantras, etc., to inflict some harm on someone, e.g. to cause him a sore red eye or some painful swelling in the body, or to render his hunting efforts fruitless. barabari (af) always; equal, like; pass. to be equal, like

bara-bati(tan) (a-afe) of fruit producing vines (e.g. kakaru, suku), extending and giving fruit over some area (with verb jo:, etc) bara-buru (as-g3) of soil, to be soft and damp so that one will sink deep into it (i.e. several inches), sometimes with a suction noise.

(see also bar-bur) bāṛa-buru (1-3) - to be half crazy, e.g. to speak nonsense, act

in a ridiculous manner.

bara-chiti (RT-fafa) bin the

common krait.

barad-bered(tan) (-3)- the cry of many goats or sheep (with verb ra:, etc.)

baram (33) a dwarf (usually referring to a spirit except in terms such as baram-lekan hö, a dwarf (man) and baram-lekae: harakana, 'his growth was stunted' (like that of a dwarf)

*baram bongako dwarf-like malign spirits (these are considered to be servant spirits to the juguni spirits.)

32

*baram jarom an abnormally small egg baran (4) poetic parallel with bari (af) - poetical parallel of

balanced on the shoulder; a load so carried.orfe) ow-und

katab, to fast (form boron also sirma, sky, (used in hero: prayer) bari (af) daru form used in prayers and poetry for bai daru, the banyan tree.

used)

baran (3) the shining of the full or near full moon; pass. - of the full or near full moon, to shine

baranda (31) - a verandah (pindigi is rather a raised barisika (af) - a swelling of the

baripiyun (afety) oe -

verandah)

barandi (f) - a barber baran-burun (333-333) the

buzzing sound of men conversing. baraw (s) to increase, make big

(from Hindi) ammad

barayu (g) a bee which nests in the ground and whose sting is

quite painful.

bar-bur (-) of soil, to be very animal will immediately sink down into it, often with a suction noise. (bara-buru would imply soil less soft than this) (bar-bur is used as follows:- ote bar-burgeya, ote bar-

burge siyo:wa or ote bar-burtange siwo:wa)

barchad-burchud (age) of a field, to have several high spots protruding above the general level (hence, to be uneven), see also burchud

bardu (g) - blasting, to blast bare (a) a younger brother or male cousin (used by a woman); the male white ants found with the flying ants.

baredo (a) otherwise, or else, (alternate form of banredo) baremate (a) otherwise (alternate form of banremate) bari (af) to carry a load. suspended on both sides of a pole

the wwow out and Greyheaded Myna

lymphatic gland in the groin (also baisika, q.v.) me CHE bariya (af) - two (long form)

*bariya kata bonga a witch (two-legged spirit) oldindan

*bariya kata kula a thief (two

legged tiger) und

bariya (af) very good, superior,

of fine quality; very well bar-jete (are) the full glare of soft and wet so that a person or the sun (also jete-bar)

bar-ji (-) pass. -to become pregnant (two-souled)

barki (af) a thick cloth used in

the winter.

barlanga (cm) to have white patches on one's skin. (An

alternate form of bangara) baro (R)- twelve (from Hindi, used in Ho in prayers for an indefinite large number, the Ho form gelbariya is also used in this way) baro (a) two people xa) nollas

baro bai (mai) kukur chawa-bawra - the name given to a spirit invoked while exorcizing a karo pira (q.v.) (Kukur prob. From Sanskrit for dog, and this possibly refers to a spirit believed to be dog-like in appearance).

baru (a) daru - the "kusum" tree (the best lac is procured from this); Schleichera trijuga, Willd., Sapindaceae, B.49/5, H.49/5/1; its

33

wood is used for firewood and for making ploughs and levelling planks; the pulp of the fruit is eaten, and oil is extracted from the the evening meal ming ber seed.

basan (s) to boil water *basan da: singi about 4-5 P.M. when water is put on the fire for

Anded *basan-goe: to sterilize by boiling; to boil and let cool off. Fed

*baru chaya - a beetle which has pink wings and which eats the fresh leaves of the baru tree; This is also called ara: chaya

basi (af) left over from the previous day; the day after the main day of any feast.

baruwa (aga) a term used in reviling, e.g. konda baruwa, 'you stupid dummy' borivily dord day.

bas (a) a bus, also serbiske *basi diyan - rice beer which has been strained the previous day.

basa (1) a temporary residence; to reside temporarily *basa-angara to stay overnight at

some residence

*basae owa: - an inn, a lodging

house.

*basa sangar- a hunt of many days during which the hunters camp out in the jungle

basa (a) - one off by itself, solitary (used in certain contexts, e.g. of a tree, a house, e.g. basa madkam, 'a solitary mahua tree'; a tola of one or a few houses off by itself) (sometimes this retains the term basa after it has grown) *basa basa one here and one there some distant apart.

*basa bata - a large size bata,

'quail'

*basa hati - a rogue elephant *basa kuru - a large wild boar

*basare - alone, off by itself, e.g. of a solitary tree or house.

basa bandu (g) a kind of creeper, the tender shoots of which are edible and sometimes eaten by cowherds, etc. (This is much like ii: towar and is prob. Vitis tomentosa, Heyne., Ampelidaceae, H.47/1/9, B.47/9)

*basi da: -water which has been in the chatu from the previous

*basi dundu da: water in which rice was cooked the previous day.

*basi geje:-geje: - for something, e.g. cooked rice or curry, to be exceedingly stale to the point of almost rotting.

*basi mandi cooked rice which has been kept overnight without putting water into it, and hence which has developed a smell (cooked rice into which water has been put is referred to as da: mandi even when taken the next day which is usually the case)

*basi moroe:- something held over for two days (may be used of rice beer, also of the day after basi of the mage feast, also called mage

moroe: or har mage)) basi (a) a fish hook; to fish with

a line and hook.

*basi danda: a fishing rodated *basi sutam - a fishing line

basiyam (f) - to take something to eat about basiyam singi time; pass. to become this time (used) in terms basiyamakana, it has become basiyam singi time', or singidoe: basiyamo:wa, "The sun logo will reach basiyam singi time')

34

*basiyam singi - about 8 to 10 A.M. *basiyam tikin - some time about

winnowing basket) when you do not have you starve)

10A.M. to noon. 10 (8 bata-bati (21-afe) to fall over *hurin basiyam about 8-9 A.M. repeatedly (see bati) *maran basiyam - about 9-10 A.M. basmati (1) baba a variety of small grained rice for lowland fields, very tasty and sweet smelling fusal you a zabran

basu-hesa: (ar'-) a tree resembling the hesa: tree, but having slightly bigger fruit and more wide-spread branches; probably Ficus infectoria, tall tog Roxb., Moraceae, B.125/10, H.125/ 8/7

bat, bato (ara, arat)-rheumatism bata (a)-bamboos or harasae jata used to reinforce thatch or to fasten jayu, on which tiles will be put, more tightly to the seneyor (N.B. jayu is used of the thin strips of wood put across the seneyor to support the tiles or thatch) bata (a) - a type of artificial spur (kati) on a cock which has two handles for tying it on very tightly. A date

bata (a) daru a branch or bati (af) a lamp wick; a bright branches of the tiril tree planted lamp, e.g. electric (see dibri, lalten on the batauli feast (used on for the lamps usually used in the prayers of the batauli feast). bata () - a grasshopper

*bata-somsö:rko - a collective noun

for grasshoppers

bata (a) a kiln

*bata-sengel - the fire of a kiln

bata (a) oe- the Common or Grey Quail cost indon

batara (as) of a woman, by using undue pressure, flattering, exaggerating and the like, to urge a girl (woman) to elope with a man

*batara-0:1 - same as batara

batari (af) thin (of a person); high pitched (of a voice) bagus

*batari salangi-properly thin and

batauli (aaraf) a sacrifice to obtain protection for the paddy when it starts to flower so that insects won't eat it, to obtain proper rain, etc.; the feast for the same; refl. to observe this sacrifice and feast

bati (afa) a daily portion of uncooked rice given e.g. to a cowherd (besides this he receives an annual wage of a certain number of baskets of paddy, depending on the number of cattle, sheep, etc.)

homes) *bati-kuntu- a lamp-stand

bati (af) a small measuring cup sale (about a half seer)

bați (af) to overturn, to knock over something standing upright; pass. of something standing, to fall its side; refl. to turn over, to turn from side to side.

bata:-bata: (-a) to starve (scrape for a little bit to eat) (Note *bați-adu -to overturn causing to saying: mena:redo hata:-hața: go down ong bano:redo bata:-bata: 'when you have there is abundance (hața: -

*bati-atom to remove something out of the way by turning it over

35

*bati bandi - a paddy bundle, the

outer ropes (bandi bayer) of which are fixed by rolling the bundle along the ground.

*bati-chakaden to pretend to turn or fall over (refl. form)G

*bati gunu-gunu - to overturn and repeatedly roll over.

*batin-batin - (refl. form repeated) -roll over (said playfully at the end of a verse by one playing the banam or the flute).

*bați uru another name for the guri: uru (dung beetle), so called because making a ball of dung, it rolls it over into a hole which it has made.

batid (afas) same as batil, q.v. batil, batı:1 (afact, adet) a word (not translatable in a uniform way) put after a word or phrase to which the main subject is compared, usually unfavorably, indicating that the subject would prefer the action to which batil is attached than that to which it is compared, e.g. achado ka rasakowa, kako herdaiyanredo rowa batilko rowaya. "They do not like to sow in water; if they have not been able to sow, they would rather transplant (they would prefer to transplant); Sometimes used after a noun or pronoun, e.g. ae: alom emaiya, am batil jomeme, 'Do not give it to him, rather you eat it.

batilo used in a story-song in the term bet batilo apparently meaning the same as bet danda:, a rattan cane' (bațilo is not a Ho word. Some story songs mix some Oriya with the Ho) batin (afasi) - same as batil, q.v.

batin (arfast a poetic parallel to hiyatin, 'to feel pity' (more often chakatiń is used for this)

bato (are) -rheumatism (also bat) batuwa (a) a long-standing swelling esp. in the foot or leg; elephantiasis; pass. To be thus swollen

*batuwa a:- an edible herb, some times cultivated and sold in the market; Clenopodium album, L. Clenopodiaceae, B.109/3 H.109/ 1/1

*batuwa kata - a badly swolled leg or legs (this term when referred to someone (batuwa kaṭäni:) would be spoken in ridicule or scorn)

bau (3) whitish matter or mould which forms on certain objects (e.g. bakara fruit, paddy stalks, leather) which start to decompose; of mould, to form bau (3) older brother, or older male cousin

*bau dada - older brother *bau honyar- a man's wife's older brother; a woman's husband's

older brother

baul (3) to be mildly crazy (normally transitory) as a consequence of a serious illness; used as parallel with rum, 'to shake in a trance'

baura (3) mildly crazy (syn. of bara-buru, q.v.); of e.g. a spirit, to make someone mildly crazyd

*baura marmar a slim black centipede smaller than the sengel marmar and not poisonous, called baura because of the irregular way in which it wriggles along. na

bauri (sf) of a woman, mildly crazy (see baura); figur. to do something in a foolish or stupid manner

36

bawa (a) to invoke a spirit by such means as putting sinduri, lighting incense sticks and the like such as is done by a soka (compare the words dako and raui: which would be used of the way in which a dewa more typically invokes a spirit, i.e. by inspecting rice grains,

hata: goso:, etc.) bawna ()- same as bawa, q.v.

bawo: (a) - wildcat (also a spelled bão:)

bay ()- a narrow strip of plaited palm leaves (these strips are stitched together by means of strong twine into palm mats, jati)

baya (a) crazy; to make crazy *baya-bacha: delirious; the confused state of one overwhelmed e.g. with too many pressing works

to be done. *baya-balu delirious; speaking nonsense when delirious.

*baya churdu - a type of churdu bonga which causes temporary insanity to those whom it

attacks. Fablo *baya juguni - a servant spirit to

rankani juguni and bir jugunion) *baya konka - dull wittted; of e.g. a spirit, to cause someone to become dull-witted; pass. - to become dull-witted.)

*baya-seya-nonsensed

*baya-tuta insane (a generic term, tuta means 'epileptic')d

baya:-bata: (-e) to roam from place to place looking for or asking for something, and

bayan (as) a: - an edible creeper found in the jungle, prob. Vitis auriculata, Laws., Ampelidaceae, H.47/1/16, B.47/6., for which Haines gives 'baiang' (this may a cloth

not be eaten until after the hero: sacrifice has been performed). *bayan togo a larger type of togo (a variety of civet cat): a smaller variety is called biskal togo) bayda (au) a castrated male goat;

to castrate by cutting (cf. kuta) bayed (ar) at least (often used after a verb root followed by a full

verb form from that same root). bayer () a rope; to tie with a rope, (a rope seen in a dream could refer to a snake and the threat of a spirit to throw a rope at someone could mean that he would send a snake to bite that person) *bayer-adu - to let down by a rope. *bayer a:-sar a bow in which the bow string is made of rope instead of a thin strip of bamboo (made for

small children to play with) bayna (a) an advance paid on something; earnest money given to clinch a sale-contractanbht

be: (a) spittle; to spit (takes transitive verb forms); to spit upon (be: means to spit out saliva; lele: is used meaning to spit out e.g. a seed or food)

*be:-da: - spittle

*be:-0:1 - to spit out saliva. *be:-topa - to spit all over (used in

prayers with the parallel kae:-topa with the figur. meaning of 'to show disrespect')

bebe-bebe (-a) a loud call made by repeatedly putting the back of the hand to the mouth producing a sound something like bebe-bebe (used when hunting to excite a sail (bison) or to urge one another on to kill or trap a sail)

bed (बेड) to tie the top of a mouthed vessel, e.g. a chatu with
