109
(4) an exclamation sometimes used preceding a vocative, and sometimes used affixed to a word as given under hai(:), q.v.
() - lac (usually in the plural eko); the lac insect; an insect which attacks the soft matter (tumul) inside the stems of the paddy plant (stem borer?)
-ed (एद) affixed to participial forms to indicate an action having been done (same as te or-chi, Les.34)
edel (एदेल) daru - the Red Silkcotton tree, Bombax malabaricum, DC., Malvaceae, B.26/3, H.26/12/1
*edel sanga the tapioca plant, Manihot utilissima, Pohl, Euphor- biaceae, B.29/26, H.29/3/2 (its leaves resemble those of the edel daru)
edka, edkan (एका, ए‌ङ्कन) bad; pass. - to become bad; of pain, cold, etc. - very much
*edka-ichi to make bad; to spoil something; to corrupt someone *edka nelo: to be ugly
*edka sowana to have a bad odour, to smell bad edlekan (एड्लेकन) (same as edkalekan) very bad(ly);
ée:(ken) (एएः) - an exclamation of distress; to make such an exclamation (with verbs of falling, etc. e.g. ée:kene: gureyana)
ee: (९९) to extinguish a fire or a light; to erase; to make an end to; (pass. eyo:); of language, indistinct;
to speak indistinctly; with med, to dazzle or temporarily blind (due to
some bright light, etc.) *ée:-era: to wipe out
ega (एगा)- yes (with the polite enclitic ga. This would imply a word e for yes', however e along is never used
' but eya)
egen-egen (एगेन-एगेन) to feel the heat emanating from a fire; to have a burning fever
eka (एका) to exclude, pass over (when giving, etc.); to disregard, e.g. aya: kajiń ekakeda, I disregarded his words'
eka-jaki (एका-जकि) - of small children just learning to walk, to run with
the legs apart taking small steps ekdom (एकदोम) at once (from Hindi 'ekdam', not often heard)
ekela (एकला) to sway, shake e.g. when dancing, in joy, etc. (not from cold or fear for which there are other words)
ela (एला) an exclamation inviting someone to come (dual elan, pl. elabu)
*elan-dolań(tan) to ask one another to share in one's activities (saying elań, dolań) elan (एलड)- to feel the heat of a fire
(Les. 26) em (एम) to give; to put; to give as an offering (to a spirit)
*em-bema to be unable to recollect where one has put something
*em-br to give someone enough to eat to fill his stomach *em-biyur to give or put around
(e.g. to various people sitting around) *em-bugin to give properly (to give with proper respect); to cure by giving *em-chal to pass along from one
to another; to give something through a series of intermediaries *em-chal mandi rice cooked by another (not by oneself) and then passed on
*em-ched hospitality *em-chote: to almost but not
quite give (Les. 27) *em-churu-churu to put
something in a heap progressively becoming smaller toward the top
*em-darom to give to one upon his arrival, e.g. water for him to wash his feet; to oppose (e.g.
something from falling) by putting something, to put facing something (recip. epem-daparom 'to put
facing each other') *em-era: to give away e.g. something not much valued; to put
something down and leave it there *em-goe: to kill by giving (e.g. poison)
*em-hapa to put and leave it there
*em-hita to put aside as seeds *em-id-to continue to give; to keep on giving
*em-jar to amuse by giving *em-jom to give to one's advantage, e.g. when one hopes to get something in return (jom here
is a reflexive usage and not with the
meaning 'eat')
*em-kesed to put in such a way as to shut in or block off *em-koton to put in order to
prevent someone from passing *em-kul to give by sending through someone
*em-labu: to entice or win over by giving something (also em-luba:) *em-leka to give or put experimentally (to see what will happen)
*em-luba: same as em-labu:, q.v.
*em-misa to share with em-nam to finish off by giving (em-chaba)
*em-5:l to give enabling someone to go out (e.g. to give someone his meal so that he can go out to work)
*em-ondo: to give more; to give again
*em-pura to give fully (as much as can be given)
em-renk to absolutely give *em-sagom to place in an orderly
way
*em-sid-to kill off a family (cf. goe:- sid) by giving e.g. poison *em-ten- to put something thereby
weighing down
*em-undi to store up em-ura to give back; to return something to the one who gave it
eman (एमन) - et cetera, and so forth; (can be used as noun or verb); as verbal affix to be quite likely, e.g. huju:-emanako it is quite likely that they will come'
em-chum (ए'म-घूम) of one sitting still, to move slightly from side to side (used in refl. form-em-chumen) en (एन) that
*en daran of that (period of) time,
e.g. en daran höko 'men of that time'; in that place en (एन) to thresh (separate grains
from a stalk). en can refer to any type of threshing, but is usually used


110
of threshing with the feet, for threshing by driving cattle tär is usually used, and for threshing by beating the sheaves against bamboo rods, hãsa is usually used
*ende-ende the same of many objects
*en-kata to thresh cleaning the stalks of grains (N.B. kața here does not refer to feet, see 2nd meaning of kața, also jom-kata) en (एन) to wake up
*mi en the first deep sleep (until one first awakes)
ena (एना) that thing, sometimes used to indicate a question in the same way as ente, 'are we to conclude?", 'are you implying? (sometimes in a sarcastic way)
*ena lagid therefore enamente therefore *
enań (एनज) only after; recently past (Les. 33); am enań would mean 'prescisely you' (not someone else)
*enań pan a short time ago (within a few hours)
enaña: (एनाक) - only after; must (Les. 33); the object (inanimate) of some time back (i.e. an object which we
were discussing or dealing with a short time ago) *enanai: the one (animate) of some time back (see enana:)
enate (एनाते) therefore
enda: (एंड)- to throw away, get rid of; to trip and fall; to spill (chakol enda:) (an alternate form of era:, Les. 27)
*enda:-ad to miscarry (a foetus)
*enda: chatu a small chațu, usually a small sized tundi or a tänger, in which the clothes of someone being purified after child birth are boiled near the village spring, which chațu is then abandoned there
ende (()-big for its type, over-sized (sometimes used in the term endelekana:)
endel (एजेल) to leave over at a meal or when gleaning (this word is restricted to these two uses, sare: is much more general); left over endo (एन्दो) an alternate form for enredo, if that is the case', 'in that case'
endor (एंदीर) - that distant
endora (पंदोस) that distant thing; that distant place
ene: (एनेः) an interjection calling attention to something at a distant,
cf. ne: for something at hand; used before enka meaning in that
(stressed) way ened (रनेड) not only that but; rather
eneka (एनेका) an excluding, depriving, by-passing (verbal noun
of eka) eneko (एनेको) - those ones (animate),
(a variant form of enko) enem (एलेम) a gift (verbal noun of
em 'to give') enete: (एनेटे) beginning (verbal
noun of ete :, 'to begin') enete (एने'ते) after that
eneto (एनेतो) teaching (verbal noun of eto, to teach')
enga (एगा) mother; the female of a species (Les. 38); to mature, develop,
become deeply enrooted e.g. a tuber (daka) from which new offshoots have come, the roots of certain grasses (püyal, chiru, etc.) which have spread extensively, a wound which is long standing and from which perhaps other wounds have developed, an hereditary
111
disease which takes deep roots in a family *enga-apukiń parents (for 'my
parents', 'your parents' etc. see Les. 38)
*enga buţa a deeply rooted stalk from which other stalks develop *enga daka a tuber from which new offshoots develop
*enga daro the thumb (a term
enre enan (एनरे एनड) only then enreyō (एनरेयो)- nevertheless
ente (एन) then; sometimes used to indicate a question (sometimes
used in S. Kolhan) *enga didi the Whitebacked or
Bengal Vulture *enga ganda the thumb
*enga hanar mother-in-law (usually called merely hanar,
but enga hanar can be used to
distinguish from e.g. hatom-hanar) *enga-jyal a yellowish colour of chickens
*enga katub the thumb (used in S. Kolhan)
*enga-sandi man and wife; of animals, male and female enika (एन्का) - like that, to do like that
(short form of enleka); sometimes
it means just like that' i.e. some- how or other, without proper preparation, etc.
*enka jön so so (a little less than desired, but not too bad) *enka-lagan to tire oneself out
doing such a thing (refl. form) *enkare in that case; if that is the case
enkan (एकल) that kind of ( ival usage)
enkana: (एकनः) - a thing of that kind; such a thing as that
enko (ए०को) those ones, they (animate pl.).
enrecha (एनरेचा) it is only in that case, isn't it! (colloquial, difficult to translate = en +re+cha)
enredo (एनरेवी) if that is the case; in that case
in a sarcastic way) epelań (एमेलङ) to heat oneself in the sun, bask in the sun; (this is the
recip. of elan, 'to feel the heat of a fire implying here a mutual inter-action between the subject and the sun)
epera-ipiri (एपेडा-इपिडि) of two parties who are at odds with one
another, for each to leave off some work, etc., because the other doesn't do it
eperate (एपेराते) - his wife (Les. 38)
epesed (एपेसेड़) to check (block) one another (recip, of esed); of hunters, to await ready to trap or kill an
animal which others are driving in
their direction (those so waiting are called epesedre mena:ko or merely epesedko), (kepesed is also used for this)
epeser (एपेसेर) counter claims of possession, esp. of land; a land dispute (recip. of eser)
ar (२५) of woman, to put on a sari or langa adjectar-5:len to go out wearing a sari
or langa (refl. form) era (एरा) wife; woman; to take a
wife; eran to have a wife
era-jom to get oneself a wife (This is the refexive jom, not the root 'to eat')
en lagid (एन लगिङ) therefore enleka (एग्लेका) - like that; to do like that
era-uru a doublet (jingle) for era in an abstract or general

12
connotation (not for a particular woman), e.g. as used in the expression erän-uruwan, 'to be in the married state (of a man) (see also note under uru)
ready to fight)
erel (एरेल) to envy, envy; to feel
resentment (e.g. of the wives of two brothers in a joint family) towards one who does not do his or her share of the work *erel-eperel a general term for
envy and resentment (Les. 46)
era: (एक) to throw out; to get rid of; to let slip from the hand; to trip and fall; verbal affix out, away, utterly (Les. 27); (The recip. epera: is used in the expression mandi chațu epera:, 'mutually get rid of the pot for cooking the family meal' on the occasion of the death of a close relative)
orenga (एरेंगा) irascible; bullying (means much the same as patub) esa (एला) an emphtic exclamation esed (एसेड़) to check, prevent (also kesed)
*era:-bage/bagiya enough to throw away of food,
*era:-misa to throw out along with eran (एरङ) - to scold; a scolding
*eran-chakad to pretend to scold *eran-darom to meet (someone coming) with scolding
*eran-kopar to scold; a scolding *eran-lagan to exhaust oneself by scolding (refl form)
*eran-al to expel by scolding erasiń (एरासिज) a kind of jungle creeper which is very sturdy and is often used as a rope, e.g. in fencing a garden; prob. Porana paniculata, Roxb., Convolvulaceae, B.96/24, H.96/7/1
*erasiń bayer rope made from the erasin creeper
ere (एरे) an omen; to cause an omen; to show something as an omen (.e.g with Sinbonga as subject)
*ere hasu a sickness resulting from an inauspicious omen
*ere panditi a person skilled in
interpreting omens ere (ए) oe a woodpecker
eregar (एडेगर) to become embold- ened; to become excited (of one
esekar, eskar (एसेकर एसकर) alone esel (एसेल) fair (in complexion). *esel-berel of a man or woman, fair complexioned and young
esel (एसेल) daru an alternate form of hesel daru, q.v.
eser (एसेर) to claim or take posses- sion of (esp. land, but also other things); to appropriate eskar see esekar
esu (ए) very (the form isu is also used); used also in term esu toran (see below)
*esu-esu very many "esu jati very, very much indeed (
more emphatic than esu used alone) "esure enan after a long time (e.g. of many hours or days)
*esute usually, generally, most of the time *esu toran used in highly
colloquial expressions to indicate that what one requests is out of the question and will not be granted, e.g. to a small child asking for money.
esu toran amge poysa, 'you want money, that is ridiculous'. Sometimes the same expression is used without toran
eta: (एटः) other; another thing (inanimate)
*eța:-eţa: various
E11
*eta:i:, eta:ni: another one (animate)
etań (एलड) thin
*etan-etan thinly spread (e.g. fertilizer); growing sparsely (i.e. not many to a given area) -šte (a) - postposition from, than
(in comparisons); since, after (affixed to participial forms, Les. 33)
ete: (एते) an exclamation calling attention to some noise 
ete: () a spark; to give off sparks, Pass. of sparks, to fly (also oţe:) 
ete: (एटे) - to begin (Les. 27); with dir. personal obj. to make one begin to feel pain, etc. (something undesirable)
eted (एटेड) a feeling of oppresion when one is overcrowded, enclosed in too much clothing, in an over- crowded room, etc.; an oppressed feeling due to people with whom one can not get along 
eteke: (एटेके) - a kind of cactus tree (see also std daru)
eteko (एलेको) an exclamation used to call attention to multiple noises 

etekote (एटेकोटे) - a slight movement (squirm) of the body; to squirm or twitch slightly

etēțeyod (एटे टेयोङ) - the Redwattled Lapwing (a bird) 

eto (एतो)- to teach; to know (e.g. a language); refl. to learn (teach oneself); verbal affix- to be feasible, to be possible, e.g. mandi jaked kako jom-etokeda, 'they could not even eat their food' (occasionally when it is clear from the context eto is used with this meaning without a previous root. (N.B. This can take a transitive form (e.g. etoetana and in the past etokeda) in which case it translates possibility, e.g.
he could not', or it can take an intransitive form (e.g. ető:tana, in which the check is barely pronounced, and in the past etoyana) in which case it translates feasibility, e.g. it was not feasible *
for him' (because of certain obstacles, e.g. a lack of leisure) eto-chal to pass on some
teaching from one to another eto-darato come having learned *etowan-etowan each one in the
way that he knows (has learned)
etol (एतोल) to go through the
motions of doing something without actually doing it; to pretend to do something; to simulate an action etom (एतोम) right (as distinct from left)
etom ti the right hand (also called jom ti) etom (एतोम) of one ploughing, to
leave spaces between furrow *etom-etom the same (of a
repeated action) etowar (एतोयर) ud a particular variety of edible mushrooms
eya (एया) yes; to agree (Les. 36) *eya-ke to agree (eya +
exclamation kë, q.v.) eyan (व्यङ) mother (vocative) eyob (एयोब) of some activity, to get
into full swing @yod-eyod(tan) (एंयोन एंयोड़) - the cry made by a frog, e.g. when caught by a snake (with verb ra:, etc.)
eyon (एयोन) to get awake (more common forra is en)
