114
G
-ga (गा) an enclitic indicating respect (used more toward Chakrad harpur and the North of the Ho country)
ga: (गः) to sew (with thread and needle)
*ga:-jerkod to sew torn clothes by pulling together (without putting patches)
gã (') side shoots of paddy, bamboo, etc.; to produce side shoots; offspring; children (the form gara is also used)
*ga-baran - to divide off forming new offshoots (refl. form used in prayers)
*ga honko assistant spirits to buru-bonga
*ga-6:l to produce side shoots Gã (") - the village of Ajodhya near Chakradharpur
*gå porob an annual feast held in Ajodhya village
gabaw (गबाव) - to dye or change the colour of water e.g. with blood; of the colour of water to be so changed. (This word can also be used e.g. of soap changing the colour of water,
however dobo: would be used of muddying water, e.g. to daze fish) gabe (गये) - of a wound, to become white with puss (infected) gacha (गचा) - a small rounded-off
flat object (e.g. a piece of tile) thrown in certain games, eg. in kacha: kacha: (hop-scotch) and dobol-dobol (in which first a gacha is thrown, and then someone tries to hit it with a dobol)
gachiya (गचिया) to remove paddy seedlings from one place and put
them in another where more are needed; (this is done with a small three pronged hoe, after reploughing. 'gachi' is the Hindi word for seedling)
gachiyaw (गचियव) same as gachiya gada (गदा) a donkey, ass
gaded (गवेद) - the slimy alga found floating up from rocks in ponds during the monsoon; the colour of this (a dark bluish-green)
gadelad (गदेलद्) same as gadolae: gadi (गदि) a throne gadi (गा'दि) - to pile up, heap up, e.g.
wood gadi-pere: to heap up fully *
gadi (गडि) a ravine cut out by water (the form gadiya is also but less commonly used. See also lor, dora, dakud); used in prayers as poetical parallel with siń or stud probably with the meaning here given
gadiya (गडिया) - same as gadi, q.v. gadolae: (गदोलएः) - green slime found floating on top of stagnant bodies of water (also gadelad)
gadra (गडरा) a ram (around Chaibasa the form godora is more commonly used)
gaduru (गडुरु) putam a big bluish jungle pigeon, the cry of which sounds like a deep moan, prob. the Blue Rock Pigeon
gaduwa (दुरा) a particular drum-beat and tune used for the bi feast (also called jadur, q.v.) gaelan-guilun (गएलड-गुइलुङ) - to
move around slowly, to mope (used e.g. of a thief looking for his opening, or of a dog moping around) gaenta (गरता) a pickaxe
115
gagara (गगारा) a large brass pot sometimes found in the homes of the more wealthy
gagarsa: (गगरसः) an acrid (bitterly pungent) sensation in the mouth caused by eating hada: or the like gai (गइ) a small monkey, the Rhesus Macaque
*gai dumbu, gaiko dumbu a name given to kukuru dumbu (q.v.) esp. by children who tie together many of these grasses (with long tufts resembling hairy caterpillars)
to form a figure reminding one of a monkey. For a like reason this is also called tuyu (jackal) dumbu *gaiko lundi: daru a tree,
probably another name for sandab siń daru, q.v. (H. gives 'gae-ka-lundi as the Hindi name for his)
*gai sane: a herb resembling kurti, but stretched out much more extensively, and giving smaller thinner pods (some places also called buru kurti) Prob. Atylosia scarabaeoides, Benth., Papilionaceae, H.53/36/4, B.53/11
gajar (गजर) the carrot, Daucus carota, L. Umbelliferae, H.74/12/1, B.74/5
gajara (गजाडा) - of a place, to be dirty. e.g. because of something rotting in a damp place, or because of excrement (also jagara)
ga:l (নাল) - same as gatad, q.v. gala (गला) of the sound of one's voice, to be restricted and not clear, e.g. because of a sore throat *gala terka - a variety of the terka
bird but making a more muted sound than the fer-ter sound made by the terka bird
galań (गलङ) - to plait, e.g. hair, mats *galan-binti a litanyum
*galan-datob to plait compactly *galan-rotod a plaited hair-knot galaw (गलाव) - to dissolve (better Ho would be leya)
galmande: (गलगंडे) to dirty something with one's dirty hands (used esp. of dirtying dishes) galti (गलति) a mistake; fault; to make a mistake; to commit a fault gama (गमा) rain; to rain (transitive in form and takes animate subject, i.e. gamakedae:, 'it rained')
gama-ādu to rain down (upon) (used also in figurative sense of raining e.g. blessings upon someone)
*gama-beta of rain, to continue throughout the rainy season gama-gama in the rain (while
rain continues), e.g. gama-gamae: sentada, 'He walked in the rain'
gama-jjyä to make moist by rain *gama-lebe: to make soft by
raining upon (e.g. a field) *gama-lum of rain, to make wet; pass. to become wet by rain
*gama-mulu: of rain, to come
down heavily for some time (2-3 days) until the new moon (mulu:) has appeared (used with chandu: as object)
*gama-pura to rain throughout the year
*gama-reya to make cool by raining
*gama-to: of rain, to fall on (someone or something)
gama, gamae (गमा, गमाए) poetic parallel for disum, country, used only in prayers and songs gami-gami (गमागमी) to be shy or
feel shame; sometimes used with a -tan participial form and a verb 'to go' meaning 'to slink away out of shame

116
gama-gumu (गमा गुम्) same as gami-gamt
gaman (गमङ) a ticklish sensation; to feel a ticklish sensation (Les.26); used as poetic parallel with giyu: meaning 'to feel shyness or shame' gamar-gumur (ममर-गुमुर) of baby calves, to try to stand up esp. in order to drink the mother's milk; of baby mice, not yet able to see, to move around; of bigger mice or rats, to sniff around here and there esp. in search of food
gamcha (गमचा) a cloth, e.g. such as is worn around the waist when bathing
gan (गन) of something spoken, to be heeded
gan (गज) to receive some internal injury without any external wound (e.g. from some blow)
gan (गज) to echo (for which gan-ura is usually used)
*gan-urato echo
gana (गना) a sledge hammer
ganari (गनारि) a small round net for catching fish (verbal noun of gari) ganda (गंडा) four; a unit of four
cocoons, ie. gelbar ganda = 48, ganda = 80; to count by fours; used as poetic parallel to leka, to count'; a finger, a toe; as a measurement one finger the breadth of one finger *ganda hon used in prayers parallel to munda hon possibly with the same meaning 'rich', but more probably with the meaning 'poor'. (see kantar hon)
*ganda-misa poetic parallel to leka-misa in prayers, 'count among *ganda songa the space between two fingers
*ganda talkaa paw
*ganda uți knuckless
*mi ganda - when counting a unit
of four; as a measure of length-one
finger, i.e. the breadth of one finger gandhak (गधक) sulphur (Hindi) gandhras (गंधस्त) frankincense (a kind of incense)
gandi (गडि) in an oblique line, as opposed to muli (in a straight. line); either directly across (perpendicular to) or at an angle to something straight (muli); to place in an oblique line; to block by placing in an oblique line; refl. -to go off at an angle; to turn to the side (e.g. of a pig turning its head sidewards to bite); in some contexts gandi is used for horizontal and muli is used for vertical
*gandi-esed to block, e.g. a road, by putting across
gandi-koton same as gandi-esed *gandi rutu a flute into which one blows from the side (ef. muli rutu into which one blows directly from the end)
117
*gandi sarai - paddy sheaves piled up on a horizontal line on the threshing floor (compare binda sarai hisiin a circular form)
(sometimes used in counting, e.g.
gandorae (गदोरए) - haze, smog gandu (गंडू) - a stool (see also banam gandu)
gandu data jaw teeth esp. of cattle (see tanagoe: data for the molars of men) gandu janum a prickly herb
with prominent yellow flowers and prickly leaves with white veins, prob. Argemone mexicana, L., Papa-veraceae, B.8/1, H.8/2/1 (called also mani janum and tayen
data janum) *daru gandu a wooden stool
*machila gandu a rope stool
ganduwa (गंबुवा) silib a large silib, deer (for ganduwa Hoffman gives 'a buck')
ganga (गंगा) the Ganges river, (referred to in prayers) ganga-goya the Ganges river (a
term used in prayers) gangai (गंग) - maize or bajra' as follows:-
*tepoe: gangai maize (corn)
*tilae gangai bajra *gangai ata pop-corn
*gangai chari: thin pins made from tilae gangai stalks, such as
are used for sewing together leaf plates and cups; a thicker section of tilae gangai stalks (before being split. into pins) such as is used to cut the umbilical cord after a birth
*gangai kä: someone who exerts great efforts to get something (as a crow (ka:) does to get gangai)
*gangai sin the stalk of the gangai plant
*gangai sin chari: gangai chari:. q.v. same as gangara (गंगारा) - see gangara ramba
*gangara ramba - a kind of ramba (a green gram) growing on a creeper, also called gora ramba. This usually has white seeds. Vigna catjang, Endl., var. typica. H.53/50/ 3, B.53/115
gangu (n) - a kind of grasshopper, usually green in colour *gangu baţa same as gangu
gani (गनि) a stone oil press (the ordinary village wooden oil press is called janti)
ganjae (गजाए) a substance grown in fields which when mixed with cigarettes (pika) and smoked has a drugging effect, hemp (Hindi-ganja)
ganji (गंजि) a banyan (undershirt, T-shirt); refl. to put on a ganji ganţa (गटा) a bell, hour
ganta: (गल) a four cornered (at the mouth and base) basket (larger than a fopa: and smaller than a dala
ganta:) gant-gantko (गाट गारको) the joints
e.g. of one's body (from Hindi, better Ho would be konja-konjako) ganți (टि) a small bell (e.g. of a cycle; for a big bell ganța is used) gapa (गणा) tomorrow
*gapa-meyań a day or two from now gapse:-gupui: (tan) (गा'पाए-गुपुरुः)
-of a dog, jackal, etc., to slink away with the tail tucked in between the legs; of a man, to try to conceal himself or slink away out of fear or
shame (with verb sen, etc.) gapaman (गपागन) some days from now
gapater (गपातेर) - the day after (some day already referred to) *en gapater the day after that
*gapater-ichi to put off to the following day; to procrastinate
*gapatero:ge until the third day (the same as gapater jaked or ape ma jaked)
gapui: (गपुह.) to tuck up, to hold up one's clothes e.g. when crossing a river
gar (गा'र) to make lines, e.g. on a paper, into a piece of wood; to layout the compartments for the punji of a sacrifice; lines so made
gara (ग) a paste made of mud or cement for building purposes, mortar
*gara-hasa a mud-paste used for mortar in building
gara (गडा)- a river; a ditch or trench e.g. for a foundation of a house or

119
for a grave (retaining its own meaning gara is used in a prayer parallel to ari, 'an embankment')
*gara baguti a water spirit, a helper spirit to the nage or pauri spirit (another such helping water spirit is gara kachui)
gara ko: the Little Egret (bird), also called choțeyad ko:
*gara bongako spirits of the river (sometimes used in prayers parallel to buru bongako)
gara kuda a tree resembling the kuda (janum) tree, but smaller, and having bitter (heben) fruit. Eugenia heyneana, Wall., Myrtaceae. H.63/1/6, B.63/5
*gara kum (kula) a very large tiger
*gara kuți- the land along side of a river
*gara-dorako a collective noun for rivers, ditches, etc.
*gara dulbi: oe a variety of the dulbi: bird, see da: dulbi:
*gara lor a ravine in which water is running
*gara dundu a river owl. This is a big owl which stays near the river and eats frogs at night, probably the Brown Fish Owl
gara sira: the White Wagtail (bird) also called da: sira:, ef. sira: "gara sisingi haku a fish, prob.
*gara gena the sloping bank of a river
the same as sisingi haku, q.v. *gara sur a thorny plant which
*gara golanchi a shrub resem- bling but smaller than the golanchi tree and having medicinal usages
is used for medicine, prob. Xylosma longifolium, Clos., Flacourtiaceae, B.14/5, H.14/3/1 This is one of many plants used, because of their odour, in divination to protect (kesed) a village or house from harmful
*gara hasil a sharply sloping bank of a river
*gara hatana: a large forest tree sometimes used for silkworm breeding. It has a smooth bark. The Arjun tree, Terminalia arjuna, W&A., Combretaceae, B.62/8, H.62/1/4
action of spirits gara (पंडा) side shoots, children (used esp. in prayers and songs,
otherwise form ga, q.v., is more common); the expression sona-gara is used as a collective noun for gold and other such precious metals gara-giri(tan) (गड़ा-गिज़ि) the sound of many people, cattle, sheep, goats, etc. running (with verb nir or sari); the sound of many objects overturning, etc.
gara-guru (गढ़ा-गुडु) a rumbling sound of thunder; a rumbling noise in the stomach; to make such a sound
*gara ikir a section of a river where the water is very deep
*gara janum a particular thorn bush growing about one ft. high and found near steams or in places where water remains.
*gara kä: - a Cormorant (bird); also called da: kz. q.v.
*gara kachui a river spirit (see also gara baguti)
*gara katkom/karob a large crab dwelling in rivers
garam (राम) used referring to desauli in prayers, e.g. in terms hatu-garam and garam gaytiri (from Hindi gram)
*gara kikir the Brownheaded
Storkbill Kingfisher (bird)
*garam gaytiri desauli spirits of various villages (a term used in
prayers) garań, gäran (गरङ, गारठ) verbal
affix to one's heart's content, satisfyingly, satisfactorily (Les.27) ańa: owa:re garań, 'in my very house'; after ka/ka garan ofter means 'very much', e.g. ka garane: jomkeda, he ate very much. (ka
angal is also used in this way) garar-gurur (गडर-गुडर) same as gara-guru
garbina (गरबिना') pregnant (of animals)
garda-sondoro (गरदा सौंदोरी) puss (also sondoro, mata)
gärgür(tan) (गा'रशूर) to gape here and there (e.g. of a baby just learning to see). N.B. the form gärgürtiya referring to a baby would
mean that he has reached the stage where he starts to gape about looking at things
gari (गरि) - to rake together e.g. dirt into a heap; to scoop up together,
e.g. fish into a net *gari-buru to rake together into
a large heap *gari-soman to rake level
gari (गरि) a small shed made for one watching silk-worm breeding (usually branches covered by thatch)
gari (गड़ि) a cart; the wheel of a cart; pass. verb-to be supplied with
a cart *gari bara bus or train fare
*gari buti the central part of a wooden wheel into which the spokes are fitted
*gari pate a spoke of a wheel
*gari satar the planks on the sides of a bullock cart and the poles supporting these
118
mi gari a cartful
gari (गाडि) a delay; to delay; to be late; to keep someone waiting (for),
e.g. kań garimeya, 'I won't keep you waiting', diyan kań garimeya, 'I won't keep you waiting for rice-beer; after a participial form with a ke sspect marker means 'right after', e.g. enae: emke gari, right after he will put it' *joka gari chanab after a little
while
gariyo:ge for some time garowa a cage
garundi (गरुंडि) a prostrate and rooting much-branched herb
with clusters of tiny white flowers, Alternanthera sessilis, Br., Amarantaceae, B.108/4, H.108/9/1 garuru (गहरु) putam a big bluish jungle pigeon (around Chaibasa
called gaduru putam, q.v.) garuwar (गढ़वर) putam same as garuru putam
gasa-gasa (गसागसा) hoyo a light breeze (also gese-gese)
gasar (गसर) - of leaves, fruit, grains, etc. when fully ripe, to fall to the ground; of loose teeth, one's hair, to fall out; of the ba gitil (afterbirth) to come out; of a porcupine, to shed
its quills gasar-etan of leaves on a tree, to
be thinned out by falling (used in pass.form)
*gasar-nam used in prayes parallel to jan-nam in the pass. meaning 'to receive as much as could be hoped for in the process of separating the grains from the stalk' (while threshing) (see nam)
gasar (गसर) to scrub clean (e.g. cooking utensils)

anglim 120
*gasar-sapa to scrub clean gasi: (गत्तिः) to pass wind; to fart *gasi:-0:1 to make go out (drive out) by passing wind
Gāsi (गां'सि) a member of the Gansi community
*gāsi-gāsi a name used at least in some villages for a game of tag; the one who is 'it' is called 'gāsi
*gāsi-mateyarko a collective noun for Gansis and others who do menial work; used in prayers for servant spirits of maran bonga and other important spirits
*gasi tani a large wild dog which reputedly attacks cattle gapa (गांटा) - a bamboo contraption
to which a kumbad is attached for catching fish; to catch fish with this gata (गाटा)- a place on a road where people sometimes gather (used alone or in term hora gața. N.B. a mountain pass is gāți)
gatad (गल) up to, inclusive (in expressions such as baro gatad, 'the two of them')
gata: (गताल) same as gatad gataň (गतक)- same as gatad gati (गति)- to link up with others in a dancing line; poetic parallel of juri, a friend, to befriend
*gati-ader to lead interlinked dancers into e.g. the dancing akara *gati-sala- to select as a dancing partner
*gati-tala to admit someone into a line of dancers; parallel to juri-tala it would mean to admit (someone) as a friend
*gati-tukam to link up e.g. two lines of dancers
gați (पा'टि) a mountain pass gațiya (गटिया) bat a form of rheumatism or arthritis in which
121
Gau (गड) - a member of the Gaur or Gope caste
*gau-danchu: the King Crow or Black Drongo, so called because of its habit of accompanying cattle so that it might eat insects which they disturb as they move along (also called merely danchu:)
gau era a woman of the Gaur or Gope community, the Hoopoe bird (a local name e.g. in Bhrbharia, see dochod dumbi)
*gau mara a feast held in some villages at which rice beer is given to the cow-herders
*gau sim a chicken provided for those who help out (often members of the Gau caste) at times of hapala, marriage, etc.
gaudi (गउदि) - a distance of about two miles
gaui: (गां'उङ्गः) to beckon to; to lightly run the fingers across something with a gesture of
beckoning
gauń (गउञ) a mother's younger sister; the wife of one's father's younger brother; one's father's other wife (younger than one's mother)
gaun hanar the younger sister of one's mother-in-law; the wife
of the younger brother of one's father-in-law
gauni (गउनि) a kingdom (used in a story, not commonly heard)
gausala (गउत्तला) porob a cattle- shed feast, esp. that held annually at Chaibasa
gaw (ग) a wound; to wound; to cut up some surface; to cut the soil with a plough
*gaw-hejele: of a wound, to be filled with puss with the skin rotting away
gawa (पंण) - witness; to give witness *gawa pere: to give witness *gawa-saki- to witness; a witness gaya (गया) a eunuch
gāyal-gāyal (गयल गयल) an irritating sensation at the base of the tongue which causes an inclination to cough
gayan-güyuń (गा'गड-गुयुङ) to move or slink about in a slow stealthy manner (see also gaelan-guilun)
gaylan-guilun see gaelan-guilun -ge()- an enclitic emphasizing the word to which it is affixed; the use
of a root+geta verb-form of the same root is used with the mean- ing 'keep on' (doing the action ex- pressed in the root), e.g. jomgejomem ka nogodreyo, keep
on eating even if it is not tasty'
ge (गे') a man's sister's child; a man's wife's brother's child; Note verb usage- en hapanum okonreko getaziya? Where did they make that
young woman a niece (sister's child)? i.e. where did they marry her mother? (where was her mother from?)
*ge-kowa a man's sister's son; a man's wife's brother's son *ge-kui a man's sister's
daughter, a man's wife's brother's daughter
gẽ (') a kind of potoke:, q.v. (a puffball) (form gere also used) ged (गेड़) - to cut flesh; to play (cut)
a fiddle with a bow
*ged-gaw to cut into flesh causing a wound -geda (नोदा) an enclitic affixed to a
word for emphasis
gege (गेगे) used esp. by children for the gegetereń, q.v. gegete: (गेगेतेः) a kind of bitter
burning sensation in the tongue and the back of the throat from eating e.g. hada: not properly cooked gegētereń (गेगे 'तेरेज) a kind of small harmless centipede about an inch long which gives off a scent if
touched
geje:-geje: (गेजे गेजे) of a wound, to be filled with thick puss; of muddy earth, to be stamped down so as to
be sticky gejepeje (गेजेपेजे) of writing, to be difficult to read because of
overwriting, smudges, etc. gejera (गेजेरा) regularly giving
trouble to others; obstinate; to frequently harass others
gejo (गेजो) to have sores on the corner of the mouth *gejo a a mouth with sores on
the corner geju (जु) to cheat or commit a foul in a game
gel (गेल) ten (short form) *gelbar-twelve; sometimes used figuratively meaning 'many', e.g.
gelbar med gelbar luturteko gonki:ya, "They gave her in marriage with the cooperation of many people' (12 eyes, 12 ears); in a prayer addressed to a spirit, gelbar medtema. gelbar luturtema, You are very well informed' (12 eyes, 12
ears) gele (गेले) an ear of any kind of grain; of a grain, to form ears
*gele-daparom to put the ears of one stalk (of paddy) facing those of another stalk (e.g. when laying out stalks on the kolom for threshing)
pain is felt at the joints, and in which one cannot straighten up nor turn his head properly

122
*gele gangai a term sometimes used for tilae gangai (bajra)
*gele-jan- grains on the ear (not yet threshed)
*gele-omon of an ear of grain, to start to form
*gele-parom of an ear of grain to become fully formed
gele: (गेले) to throw or scoop up with the hands or with the forepaws (dogs, rats). (used of the action of a man digging with his hands e.g. to get water near a stream or scooping out rice being husked from a hole, or of a dog digging for a buried bone)
*gele:-nam to seek for or get by scooping up with the hands or forepaws
*gele:-6:1 to take out by a scooping action with the hands or paws
gelo (गेलो) - to whistle (also gole)
*gelo-dum to whistle to sleep (e.g. a durbird which closes the eyes as though dozing when hearing someone whistling)
gemer-gemer (गेमेर-गेमेर) of many fish, to join together in a school (also jemer-jemer)
gana (गेना) the sloping bank of a river; the sloping side of a hill or an embankment
gena (गेना) duran a type of song sung at the ba feast
ganda (गेंडा) a snail
*dupil genda a shell-carrying snail
genda-garur (गेंडा-गडर) a stork gendari (में दाडि) the White Stork; a pickaxe pointed at one end only
gene-gene (गेने-मेने) in a line; in a row
123
genge (गेंगे) to drink water from one's cupped hand or from both hands cupped
genger (जेंगेर) haku a small scaleless fish about 3-4 in. long genjel (गैजेल) of water, by coming in superabundance, to cause plants, esp. paddy stalks, to become very thin and weak; pass. of plants, esp. paddy, to become thin and weak due to too much water
gent, gente (गेट, टे)- to carry some bundle or somebody by a cloth slung over the shoulder and coming down on one side; a bundle so carried (the
form gențe is more common, ef. kudran, 'to carry on the back') ger (गेर) of rats, mice, grasshop-
pers, etc. to gnaw, nibble; to cut tilae gangai stalks one by one with a datarom
*gar-goso to make wither or fade by nibbling at
ger-sid to break a rope by gnawing at it
*ger-undi to gather together by nibbling or gnawing (e.g. of a porcupine thus collecting tubers to ent)
gerań (गेरड)- to wail, mourn loudly, e.g. at the time of a death of a loved one
gere (मेरे)- to tickle (someone) gere (गेडे) a duck
găre (गेंडे) a type of potoke: (the form ge is also used)
gere-gete (गेरे-रोते) to tickle; the arm-pit; of a bird or fowl, the part of the body under the wings
gere-gete undu the arm-pit (also called hatla:)
gere-mese (गेरे मेसे') to smile (pro-longedly, germoń is rather a fleeting smile)
gereń (गेरेज) : a particular herb found in the jungles and not eaten before the hero: feast (not identified, cf. E.M. gering ba, H.149/ 4/1, Β.149/10)
gereya (गेरेगा) the Jungle Bush Quail
germoń (गैरमौज) - to smile (see gere mese)
gesa (पैसा) to rub or scour vigourously, refl. gesan to rub the body vigourously against
something e.g. to relieve itching. (implies a stronger rubbing than hirga would imply. This word is more commonly heard in its reflexive form)
gese-gese (गैसे-ऐसे) a light breeze; of a light breeze, to blow gesemere:(tan) (गेसे मेरेः) to come
out in very tiny pustules e.g. heat rash, bumburi; of numerous tiny bubbles, to show in one's urine
gete-gete (गेते-गेते) in a line, in a row (e.g. peas in a pod)
getera (गेतेरा) to go along the side e.g. of a hill (can be used as a verb form or with the affix-te and a verb of motion)
geyon (नेोन) - of a light wind, to blow; of branches, etc. to shake because
of a light wind *geyon-geyon- same as geyon of a repeated or continued action
gid (पीड) - having a covering of oil, used of oil on any object or oil floating on top of water; sleek and smooth as though with a coating of oil (used thus of the smooth skin or some animals: to have a covering of oil)
*gid-leka to have a sleek, smooth appearance, e.g. gid-leka nelo:tana, it (e.g. the skin of an animal) has a sleek appearance
gid-gid same as gid, gtd-leka gida-godo(tan) (गिदा-गोदी) of a paste, e.g. mud mortar, to be rather
watery; of many small fishes, to descend together through some water course
gi-kowari (गि-कोवारि) - a dwarf fleshy- leaved plant with flowers reddish- yellow and green, Aloe vera, L. Liliaceae, B.145/3
gil (मिल) to strike with a swinging (not straight) motion of the fist
*gil-sara: to call a curse on someone by striking oneself with one's fist (see also tapiń-sara: and tam-sara:)
*kuwam gilen to strike one's breast (refl. form)
gilas (गिलास) a glass (chombe is also used for this)
*gilas bela an aluminium bela (as distinct from the more expensive käsa (brass) bela which
has a rim (kandom) around the top) *gilas täre an aluminium plate gina (गिना) a small dish for serving curry, etc.
ginduru (लिंदुरु) a mongoose *ginduru reda plant from which medicine is made for wounds. Esp
from its roots and sometimes from its leaves a paste is made which is put onto wounds even on fractured bones
ginil (নিদিল) a wall ginis (পিপিও) a thing (an alternate form for the more common jinis) giniyu: (गिनियुः) private parts of the
human body (verbal noun of giyu:)
gipal-gopol(tan) (गिपल-गोपोल) of the sari of a woman, to be wide and sweeping along the ground (with verb sen, etc.)
giri (ken) (নিজি) of a large falling object (e.g. a man or an animal) to

125
make a loud thud noise when hitting the ground (with verb gur, bați, etc.)
*giri-giri(tan) of a large animal (e.g. a bear or elephant) to make a loud thumping noise when running (with verb nir, etc.)
giti:-goe: to fall into a deep sleep, e.g. giti:-goe:yakanae: he is in a
deep sleep' *giti:-hapa to lie (sleep) still
*giti: harob nida about 11- 12P.M.
girir(leka) (गिरि) of rain, to fall with big drops making a loud noise (with verb gama)
*giti:-horo to watch over some thing by lying down near it
*giti:-juwa: to lie down unable to rise (stuck' to the bed) e.g. be- cause of extreme weakness
*girir-girir(tan) same as above of a continued action
girja (निरजा) a Christian church or chapel; Christian joint prayer girmiţi (गिरमीटि) a gimlet (tool for boring holes)
giti:-lese-lese to lie down with the arms, legs or wings spread out giti:-med to sleep
*giti:-saba: to catch up on one's
giru (निरु) diri a red stone from which colour can be gotten e.g. for dying clothes
sleep (with dum, düm-med, or med dium as object) *giti:-senger to lie down stretching oneself out at full length
*giru putam a kind of dove, reddish brown in colour, prob. the Red Turtle Dove
giti:-si:soe: to be perfectly quiet with every one asleep (or as it is when everyone is asleep)
*giti:-suwaen to take rest lying down (refl. form)
gitil (निलिल)-sand gitil disum a desert
gisir (गिसिर) to shudder, e.g. in horror, fear or disgust; used with lai: of the nervous ("sinking")
feeling one gets in the stomach e.g. when coming down on a high swing
*gisir-gisir - the same of a ued experience
giti:-düm to sleep
contingitilko the supposed invisible sand-insects or the personified sand grains which cut away at the bare
giti: (गिति) to lie down; to sleep; a place for sleeping, arrangements for sleeping, as verbal affix in terms such as agom-giti:, dili-giti: (used in prayers) to perform the action of the primary root before lying down to sleep at night in preparation for a further action, usually a sacrifice, to be performed the next day
*giti:-ādu to lie down to sleep
prayers) gitil ud same as mara: kața ud, q.v.
gtyal-gopol (गिंयल-गोपोल) to wave, e.g. of high grass or paddy in a breeze, or of a sari waving in a breeze
*giti:-an to sleep until dawn *giti:-angaran to sleep until morning
*giti: dipli bed time (about 9- 10PM)
feet of one working for long periods in water-soaked fields gitil-tanakir a place where
water comes up from sand (used in
giyu (नियु)- ghee (givu is sometimes used in prayers; in ordinary conversations gotom is used)
gobor oto kantara-jantara
giyu: (नियुः) shame, disgrace; shyness; to be ashamed; to be bashful, to be shy (Les. 26)
*giyu:-chița to cause one shame by accusing falsely
jantara (q.v.) rite performed before taking fertilizer (guri: etc.) from the dubi to put into the fields (formerly practiced, now going out of use)
gocha (गोचा) - a part of the garment folded up in order to receive something in it; to wrap in the fold of a garment; to carry something in
the fold of one's garment; something
*giyu:-gaman shame; shyness *giyu:reya: kaji a matter of shame
-go (-) - an enclitic added to words in songs merely to fill out the sound
go: (गोः) - to carry; of a man, to carry on the shoulder (with or without a
carrying pole); of a woman, to carry a child in the womb; of an animal, to carry in the mouth; of a bird, to
resembling the fold of a garment, e.g. the folded abdomen of a female crab in which she carries her eggs god (नोड़) - to pluck
*god-atom to pluck off *god-undi to pluck and gather together
goda (गोदा) - lazy
carry in the beak or claws; used in South Singhbhum with the meaning 'to take' (same as id)
*go:-ader to carry in
*go:- ādu to carry down *go:-beta destination to carry to a
goda (गोळा) to ride; to sit astride (also gora)
*go:-gur to carry for a while and then make fall (e.g. a pig runnng between the legs of a man) *go:-hapa to stand still while
godar (गोदर) to scratch or cut with a long stroke of the claws, fingernails, etc.
*godar-godar the same of a continued or repeated action
continuing to carry (something) *go:-id to carry to a place; to continue to carry *go:-inun to pass the time
godo-godo(tan) (गोडो-गोडो) the sound of water flowing into a field (also goro-goro)
pleasantly carrying (something) *go:-koton to assist someone in time of trouble or need
godora (गोडोच) - an uncastrated male sheep, a ram
*godora mindi same as godora
*go:-:1- to carry out (of a place) *go:-rakab to carry up *go:-ura to carry (hold back/up)
goe (गोए) to wilt, bend over, e.g. of something made of clay; to twist the mouth,e.g. just before crying; pass,
something so that it does not come down (e.g. as the plank over the inner compartment of a grave holds up the loose earth from falling on the corpse)
of the mouth, to be twisted toward one side (e.g. before crying or permanently) (lego has the same meaning as goe)
*goe-a a mouth permanently twisted to one side
go (गो') of yoked cattle, to drag a heavy load, one end fastened to the yoke and the other end dragging on the ground com
124
*goe-moea jingle on goe with the same meaning
goe: (गोए) to kill; to beat; dead; to extinguish a light (for this ée: is the

126
more proper word); refl. goe:en/ gojen to commit suicide; note the expression goe:kedbuwae:, 'he has killed us', 'we are dead' (said by someone who foresees certain death for himself and his companions)
*goe:-adod to decrease the number by killing or in pass., by dying
*goe:-anjed unconscious; to make someone unconscious; pass. to become unconscious, to faint
*goe:-hage to die and leave be hind (e.g. a widow or children)
*goe: bunum an inactive ant-hill (also called rõ bunum, compare jid bunum)
*goe:-chondolan to be stretched out stiff in death, e.g. when rigor mortis has set in
*goe:-chundula to die stretched out
*goe:-etań to thin out by dying (e.g. the number of paddy stalks in a field)
*goe:-muchad to die out completely
*goe:-pete-pete to die with shaking convulsions, esp. of chickens
*goe:-pocha - to escape death; goe: pochakanko, 'those who escaped death', 'the survivors
*goe:-randi to die leaving a widow; to widow; pass. to be widowed
*goe: reseke: to die with the teeth showing
*goe:-rese-rese to die with the teeth clamped and lips pulled back
*goe:-senger to cause (someone) to have a fit or convulsion; Pass. to have a fit or convulsion
*goe:-sid to kill off a family, pass.
of a family, to die off leaving no male descendant
goe:-taui: to kill by draining off water (used esp. of the effect of the sun drying out paddy fields pre venting the grains from forming properly)
goe:-taui:yan babasiń straw
which has not properly formed due to a lack of water
*goe:te jonomlen still born
*go-goe:teya: something that kills, something which is lethal goe: (गो'एः) to ladle out some liquid-laden substance, e.g. the
maya of rice beer, with the hands *gõe: diyan - the maya of rice beer
ladled out with the hands
göe:-kul to send away having ladled out with the hands, e.g. some rice-beer for the road
goe-jiyan (गोए-जियड) oe the Pitta
(a bird), also called poed piyan (both names imitating the cry of the bird) gogorsod (गोगोरसोĄ) hoarse; pass. - to become hoarse
goj, gojo (गो'ज, गो'जो) - a yard (meas- urement, Hindi gaj) goja (गोजा) pointed; a pointed stick
used for beating down paddy when putting it in a bandi; to make pointed
gojen (गोजेन) to commit suicide (refl. form of goe:, the form goezen is also used).
gojla, gojola (गोजला, गोलोला) - pointed; to make pointed
gojo: (गोजी) to die (a pass. form of the verb goe:)
*gojo:-leka in danger of death; at death's door (e.g. from sickness)
gojo-gojo(tan) of some long slen der object such as a javelin, to go in
a straight line (with verbs of going)
127
gojola (गोजोला) same as gojla, q.v. gol (गो'ल) round *göl owa: a round house; a
circular tower gol (गोल) a goal; to score a goal,
e.g. gölkedako, they scored a goal) gola (गोला) - a round ball-like growth in the stomach (at least so
conceived) golanchi (गोलचि) daru a small tree
with large scented flowers, Plumeria acutifolia, Poir., Apocynaceae, E.Μ., Β.89/9, H.89/
5/1 *golanchi ba the large white flower of the golanchi tree
gole (गोले) to whistle, (also gelo)
golgol (गोलगोल) of milk, rice-beer, etc. to spoil, turn bad, esp. due to excessive heat
golgoli (गोलगोलि) - same as golgoliya
golgoliya (गोलगोलिया) a kind of 'pakauri' (Hindi-gulgula)
goli (गोलि) - a pill gom (गोम) wheat
gom (गो'म) - to accompany someone (used alone or as verbal affix with
verbs such as sit, go, eat, etc. Les. 27) (gom takes an a affix, e.g. dub-gomakom, 'sit with them')
goma (गोमा) poroba particular feast held in some places by non-Hos
*goma chandu: the month when the goma feast is observed (the latter part of July and the first part of August)
go mata (गो माता) same as gowa
bonga, q.v. gomke (गीमके) the master of a
house, land, a work project, etc. (a servant refers to his master as gomke. Christians often refer to their pastor as gomke, and some use
it for Lord, e.g. when referring to Christ. When used with a name the word gomke follows the name (as do terms such as munda and
manki) e.g. Bodra Gomke, Father Bodra'. The forms gomkin, 'my master', gomkem, 'your master', and gomkete. 'his master' are sometimes used)
gomke-chomke a jingle on gomke with the same meaning gomond (गोमोड)- pride; to be proud (from Hindi, better Ho would be
mamaran)
gomor mari (गोमोर मरि) daru- another name for the bomor mari daru, q.v.
gompi (गोमपा') to push aside carefully with the hands, e.g. growing paddy through which one is passing
gon (गोड) to give a girl in marriage
*goń indian arranged marriage (see andi)
*gon kuiko the party (men and women) of a girl being given in marriage who go with her to the boy's house for the marriage
gon (गोड) to reply (esp. in expression kam goña or kam gon to one who is not replying) goncha (गोनथा) the fold of a
garment; to gather or wrap in the fold of a garment (also gocha, q.v.) gonda (गोजना) alternate spelling of
goyenda, q.v. gonde (गोंदे) - to scold
*gonde-chita to scold someone unjustly
gonde-darom to meet or confront with scolding
*gonde-hal to scold back gonde-koțar to scold

128
*gonde-sara: to curse by scolding (either directly or by scolding in the absence of the person scolded intending that the effect of the curse should reach him, as in tam-sara:)
gonde (गोंडे) - of an elephant, to take hold of by the curled trunk; of a man, to put his arm around (someone or something)
*gonde-biyur to put one's arm around (someone) (to embrace with both arms hambud)
gondorae (गोदोराए) haze (the form gandorae is more common near Chaibasa)
gongo (गोगो) - a narrow valley or dell between two hills
gongor (गॉगोर) - same as gongo, q.v.; used as poetical parallel with sutu: or gupi, to tend, herd
ganoe: (गोनीए) death (verbal noun of goe:, 'to die'); pass. verb to have
a death in one's family or village *gonoe: duku death throes; dying agony
*gonoe: ere an omen indicating that death will occur (also called gogoe: ere)
*gonoe:-geran grief and lamentation at the death of an acquaintance
*gonoe: saja the death penalty
*gonoe:ta: in a place (a part of the body) where death could be caused, e.g. an animal wounded in some vital part of the body, e.g. gonoe:ta:reń to:kiya, 'I hit him in a vital spot' (by someone who shot an animal)
*gonoe:-totoka danger of death gonon (गोनोड) cost; value; bride-price; to set a price; with a aspect marker to bring in a
bride-price to the benefit of e.g. one's parents (of a girl); with dir. animate obj. (e.g. kui expressed or understood) to set or receive such and such a bride-price for someone *gonoñan valuable
gonon-har to bring (drive) the bride-price (in the form of cattle, etc.) to the home of a girl being given in marriage
*gonon-har bapala the feasting held at the home of a boy when the party of the girl to be given to him in marriage come to get the bride- price
*gonon-sid to settle the bride- price for a marriage
*gonon-sid bapala the feasting held at the home of a girl to be given in marriage when the party of the boy come to settle the bride-price *gonon uri:ko cattle selected to be given as part of the bride price gānyor (गॉयोर) a tree (Hindi Dhaman) which provides good wood
for the frames of village beds, plough shafts, etc. Grewia tiliaefolia, Vahl., Tiliaceae H.28/4/8 (gives gonger), B.28/4
gopod (गोपोड़) the stalk (pedicel) connecting a fruit or flower to the branch; the pedicel of a cocoon gopoe: (गोपीए) a fight, battle (recip.
of goe:) gör (गोर) oe a small dark brown bird found in the fields when the paddy crop is getting ripe
gora (गोडा) an upland field (cultivable or not; if cultivated no embankments are formed); to make an upland field
gora chatom : a small shamrock with yellow flowers, common everywhere by roadsides
129
and in cultivated ground. Oxalis corniculata, L., Geraniaceae, B.34/ 5, H.34/3/1
*gora goch a scented bush about 1-2 ft. high, which has many medicinal usages; the common variety is green, but there are also reddish and blackish varieties *gora ote an upland field *gora ramba a kind of ramba
green gram) growing on a creeper ( (also called gangara) *gora sira: the sira: bird, the
Indian Pipit
gora (गोडा) to ride; to sit astride (e.g. of one riding a horse, the form goda is also used)
gorau (गोडार) a heavy stick used esp. to beat down the paddy into a bandi
gorgondae (गोपगोंडाए) a snake (see borgundai)
gorgora (गोरगोरा) - a very stout grass with stems often one-half inch thick and large broad leaves. Its seeds become very hard and can be used to make rosaries. Coix lachrymajobi L., Gramineae, B.139/
12, H.139/88/1 gorgora (गोरगोडा) another name for the insect called sal didi, q.v.
gorgotid (गोरगोतिद) a tiny insect which is found in mushrooms when they start to decompose or in dried fish
gorjõe (गोरजीए) a son-in-law who moves into the land of his wife's parents (which can happen esp. if his wife has no brothers)
gorob (गोरोब) - pregnant (of women. A more proper Ho and more delicate word is bar-ji, ef, garbins, pregnant, of animals)
goro-goro(tan) (गोड़ो गोड़ो the sound of water flowing in a field (also
godo-godo; to gargle; a sound of loud snoring (esp. of an animal, but also of a man)
gorojo (गोरोजी) need; necessity; care; concern; to feel the need of something; to be in need of; enreya: aña: jan gorojo bano:wa, "That is no concern of mine' (more commonly
used in negative expressions) (from Uriya, cf. Hindi garaj)
gorom (गोडोम) poetic form of gom, to accompany gorom-tala poetic parallel of
gati-tala, q.v. (so used in a prayer) gorom (गोड़ोम) grandchild, takes ending in (my gc.), me (your gc.), -te (his/her gc.) (used in some locali ties, not everywhere)
görpo (गो'रणो) to accompany someone esp. in order to look after him
gosali (गोसालि) - the mane of a horse; a like formation of hair on any animal
gosari (गोसारि) to sift out with the fingers (eg. broken bits of straw from threshed grains); to run one's fingers through the hair; to brush with a feather
gosari-o:l to sift something out. with the fingera
gosari-sapa to clean by sifting
out with the fingers "gosari-undi by sifting out with
the fingers to gather together gose: (गोसे:) to push aside in search of something (e.g. leaves in search
of a bird); to pull up a person's clothes esp. around the waist exposing the buttocks (this comes close to mage kaji, hence one must careful in using this word)
be *gose:-nam to push aside in search of (something); to find by pushing aside

130
goso (गोत्तो) to wither; shrivel up; to fade; sad
*goso-mochan to be sad faced (refl. form)
*goso-moroso sad (a jingle on goso)
*goso-moso sad (a jingle on goso) goso: (गोसोः) - to rub, e.g. two hands
together, tobacco in one's hand, husked paddy grains for divination (cf. hata: goso:), newly laid silkworm eggs with medicine (cf. ojo: to rub oil or ointment on; itir-to massage)
*goso:-era: to rub away; to brush away, refl to brush oneself off (e.g. bo brush dirt etc. away)
*goso:-gunda to pulverize by rubbing with the hand or thumb e.g. chuna
*goso:-jan- to get to the edible part of a seed by rubbing off the outer covering, e.g. of tilae gangai
*goso:-nam- to search out or find by rubbing (e.g. rubbing rice grains as a means of divination)
goța-goța a full share to each goța ote a whole field; a field
not even once ploughed since the last harvest (ie. not st-chața:kan) gota: (गोत:) to scratch, claw, maul gota:-gaw to scratch or claw causing a wound
*goso:-sapa to rub clean got, goto (गो'ट, गोटो) - a place where cattle or goats are brought to rest e.g. at noon (sometimes esp. for goats such a place is fenced off); a herd; to herd together (N.B. gotowakanako, 'they are herded together', could be used of any animals (e.g. elephants) herded together in large numbers)
gota:-nam to search for by scratching or digging up with the claws (e.g. a bear searching for the larva of white ants) gota:-:l to claw out; of a bear,
(see also goto da: and goto dub) *got(o) bonga a name given in some places to gowa bonga, q.v.
to remove with the claws, of a person, with the cupped fingers gota:-ponga to maul making a
gaping hole "gota:-undu to scratch or claw
*got(o) churdu a spirit who (if offerings are made to him) helps cowherds, but who prevents child births
making a hole
goți (नोटि)- a marble (also guli) *goți inun to play marbles
*got(o) da: water brought ceremoniously on the occasion of goto dub, q.v.
131
goto-goto(tan) (गोटो-गोटो) in a large group together (with verbs of coming, etc.)
gotom (गोलोग) ghee
gotowa (गोतोवा) a long narrow net used esp. by Birhors for catching monkeys
burning at one end without flame *guchan sengel a fire brand (as under guchan)
gowa (गोवा) a cattle shed *gowa bonga a spirit who protects the cattle shed; a sacrifice
guchaw (सुधाय) to put an end to (esp. some grief)
guchu ( the pubic hairs (in Mundari this is the common word for moustache)
to get his protection for the cattle (in many parts of the Kolhan held on the ote ili feast preceding the mage feast)
guda (गुदा) used with nida, 'night', not used alone
*gowa owa: a cattle shed *mi gowa a cattle-shed full (of
cattle)
gudam (गुदम) a shop, esp for the sale of rice-beer or arki gudi (गुद्धि) a paper-kite
gowali (गोवालि) to repay in meat, usually chicken, one who ploughs one's fields using his own cattle and plough; to repay by such work for meat received
gowari (गोवारि) to beseech, pray
gudu-gudu(tan) (गुरु-गुरु) of a swarm or flock of insects, birds or small animals, to fly or run away together (with verbs of flying or running)
(either an animate object marker may be inserted to refer to the person beseeched or are marker may be affixed to the person beseeched)
guduri (मुदुड़ि) the daily market gugu (मुगु) diri a cylindrical or globular hard stone used for grinding (done on a rid diri)
*gowari duran a petition song or hymn, a Psalm
gu-gu(tan) () round, forming into a ball (e.g. of leaves) gugula (गुगुला) a veil
*gowari giti: to offer prayers before sleeping at night in anticipation of a sacrifice to be performed the next day
gugula esed to block with a veil gugur (गुगुर) salu - the Greyheaded Myna (so called in S. Singhbhum, around Chaibasa commonly called bari-piyun)
goya (गोया) used in prayers in the term ganga-goya or parallel to ganga with the same meaning, the Ganga river'
gugura (गुगुरा) small bells, esp. those tied to the feet of dancers guguturui: (गुगलुरुङः) of rice stalks,
to remain stunted and almost
goyenda (गोयेजदा) angry and pouting (used of children and of adults, sometimes with the word patub)
grainless, esp. due to overcrowding gui (गुइ) to roll something into a ball (see guri); to form something in the shape of a ball, to round out something
goyon (गोयोन)- to wave in the breeze, e.g. tall grass, thin branches of trees *goyon-goyonto continuously wave in the breeze
güisa (गुइसा) haku a long fish, much like but much smaller than the hurti: haku and said to have a toothed dorsal fin which can cut the
guchan (गुचङ) a piece of wood
hand of one catching hold of it
goto dub to bring water and
ceremoniously place it upon a dip
(q.v.) while saying mantras, (used in connection with the initiation of chelas by a guru, esp, at the time of dosora, and also used when calling upon one's guru bonga, e.g. to expel karo pira q.v.) (There is no clear relationship between this and the meaning of göf(o) as given above) gopa (गोटा) whole, complete; in all
directions; of branches of a tree, thick; of the body of a man, animal, etc., to become fully formed; of something to be complete (none omitted, e.g the amount of diyan
agreed upon for a marriage); the thick trunk of a tree (as distinct from the branches); when referring to rice-beer goțate means 'unstrained' (i.e. with goța maya) as distinct from chalate, 'strained'

guja sui (गुजा सुइ) oe a bird, the name used in some places prob. for the chundi bird, q.v., which has a pointed (guja) heak and makes a sui-sui sound
gulab (गुलब) a rose; an ornament hung from the centre of the nose and hanging over the upper lip
*gulab ba a rose
*gulab dandi the tiny clasp fas tening the gulab nose ornament to the nose
gulal (गुलाल) - a sling-shot (also called rabola:-sar)
gulan-gulań (गुलड-गुलक) a pricking pain in the stomach gule-gule (गुले-गुले) poetic form of gul-gul, q.v.
gul-gul (गुल-गुल) having a deep dark colour, e.g. of plants, trees, deep still water, clouds
gulguli (गुलगुलि) a kind of pakauri' (also called golgoliya)
guli (गुलि) a bullet, a pill, a ball, a marble (also called goți): to form something in the shape of a ball, to round out something
*guli inun to play marbles (also goți inun)
*guli-muli to properly round out (e.g. the head of a baby by massaging it)
*guli-sutama ball of thread (more commonly called guri sutam)
*guli tuția blunted arrowhead made of iron (tuți is an arrowhead made of bamboo)
gulmal (गुलमल ) - confusion, turmoil gum (गुम) to winnow by jerking the winnowing basket up and down so that the paddy remains in the basket and the lighter chaff (pete:
and jobra) is blown away by the wind *gum-darom - to confront (oppose)
132 by winnowing (used in prayers using gum in a figurative sense)
*gum-era: to drive away by winnowing (used in prayers in a figurative sense)
guma (गुमा) of grains, to become musty or mouldy so that if sown they do not sprout or if eaten they are not tasty
gumuwa pauri (गुमुवा पांउडि) a spirit considered to have powerful control over rain
gumuraw (गुमुरय) to churn inside, e.g. of some feeling within a man, or of smoke or dust churning within
some closed space gun (गुन) quality, power, virtue (also gün, q.v.)
gun (गून) quality, power, virtue; pass. verb to become efficacious, to have an effect (This word with the long I often refers to magical power, power to do sorcery)
gup (गूम) - an alternate form of gun gunda (गुंडा) tiny particles; small bits; powder; to reduce to tiny particles or powder (often used as verbal affix in this sense)
*gunda babasiń - small broken off bits of straw
gundi (मुंडि) (uri:) a cow
gundli, gunduli (गुडलि, गुहुलि) -an
upland millet crop, Panicum miliare, Lamk., Gramineae, B.139/ 28. H.139/43/3
gundra (गुडत) to carry a load on the back; a load so carried gunduli (गुदुलि) bat a form of arthritis in which one gets painful
cramps in the sole of the foot gundun (गुनकुड)- an expression used jokingly or affectionately when call- ing someone's attention or the like. Used in the expression halai gundun
133
gunduriyad (गुद्धरियड) oe another name for the gunri: oe, q.v. gungu (गुगु) - a rain protector made
of riin leaves worn over the head and body like a bag slit down the
side, leaving the front open for work (esp. useful in transplanting and weeding work) (same as chuktt. Around Chaibasa the word chuki
is more used)
gungu () great grand parent; great grand child; older bro. of one's
father, his wife; older sister of one's
mother, her husband; a man's younger bro's child; a woman's younger sister's child
*gungu-hanar one's mother-in- law's older sister, the wife of one's father-in-law's older bro. *gungu honyar one's father-in-
law's older bro.; the husband of one's mother-in-law's older sister gungud (गुगुद) - poetic parallel of hambud, 'to embrace' gungum-chu (मुंगूम-चु) a noise made
by doves, e.g. by the Ring Dove (panduka putam)
guń-guń (गुआ-गुझ) of deep water, to be of a dark colour and awe-in-
spiring (see also br-brand mel-mel) gungur (गुगुर) salu a myna bird, prob. the Bank Myna
gunguru (गुरु) a Hindi term sometimes used for Ho gugura, q.v
guni (मुनि) sorcery, i.e. the power to cause harm to people or to their property with the help of a spirit in voked through mantras, a sorcerer *guni ho a sorcerer
guni honko benign spirits who are asked to pray to desauli bonga on the occasion of the ote ili feast. In prayers they are referred to as ote-guni bir-guni honko
guniman possessing the power of a sorcerer (see guni) गुंजा) lai: a pothelly, paunch
gunja ( gunri: (गुनरि) oe the Blackbelly (or Ash-crowned) Finch Lark, a very common bird found in open fields and staying on the ground rather than in trees
gunu (मुनु) to roll on its side, e.g. a circular lid
gunu-5:1 to roll something circular out on its side
gunur (गुनुर) - of a bird, e.g. the dur, imu, gunri, to run quickly along the
ground gupi (गुषि) to herd, e.g. cattle,
sheep, goats
*gupi-ayub to herd until the evening *gupi-basa to stay over (not
going home at night) at a place where one is herding cattle or sheep gupi-beta -to complete a certain
time of herding (see beta) *gupi-bi to see that cattle eat
their full while grazing them *gupi bunum used parallel to tingu-kesed in prayers to the spirit
of the hunt (: bonga) referring to the area over which a hunt is held with special reference to the place where the men (kepesedko) are waiting to shoot the animals being driven toward them
*gupi bunum kepesed same as gupi bunum, q.v.
*gupi-gongor a couplet used in prayers with the meaning of gupi, 'to herd'; (gongor is also used as poetic parallel with gupi) ho, gupitani: a herder
*gupi gupin (गुचिन)- a female cowherd (not used in common speech but used in a prayer apparently referring to the gopis of Hindu mythology)

134
cowdung) (cf. gūsi, dried cowdung)
gur (गुर)- to make fall from a stand ing position; pass. to fall from a standing position (ef. jyu:, 'to fall from a height')
*guri: porob the vigil of a feast
*gur-dali a fallen crest of a *gur-lompo- of paddy stalks, to fall over before the grain is properly formed because too top-heavy
*gur-sampuru to fall down upon one person, e.g. a line of dancers
*gur-sandan to fall on the back *gur-sombod-same as gur-tombo:
*gur-tombo: to fall head-forward; to fall on one's face
*gur-tumbid-same as gur-tombo: gur (गुड) -unrefined sugar (also güru) gura (s) to fence off; to fortify; of silkworms, to enclose themselves in their cocoons; a stronghold, fort
*gura-biyur to surround with fencing or fortification
*gura-esed to block off with a fence or with fortification; of silkworms, to enclose themselves in their cocoons
*gura-kesed-same as gura esed
*gura-kesedakan bajar a forti fied city
gūra (गुड़ा) a nose ornament guraku (गुड़ाकु) - a mixture of gur (mo lasses) and tobacco
gurbar, gurubar (गुरबर गुरुवर) Thursday
gurgūra (गुरगुडा) an insect, same as or similar to hurtũi:, q.v. guri (मुद्धि) a ball of e.g. thread, see gui used in stories of rooms of a multi-storied house
*guri sutam a ball of thread guri: (गुरि) fresh cowdung; to clean something, e.g. the floor of the courtyard, with cowdung; to celebrate the vigil of a feast (when the courtyards, etc., are cleaned with
*guri:-sapa to clean something with cowdung
cock*guri: ud a small black poisonous mushroom growing in clusters where cowdung is heaped on fields; a large white and brown mushroom said by some to be edible, and by others to be inedible guri: uru a dung beetle, also
called bați uru, q.v. gurmi (गुरमि) venereal disease gurtui: (गुरतुङ) to rapidly revolve
e.g. a stick between both hands to start a fire or make a hole; to turn a feather rapidly in the ear
*gurtui: daru apt wood so cut that one piece revolved against the other can start a fire
*gurtui:-6:1 (with sengel) to produce a fire by revolving one stick against another guru (गुरु) - a teacher; a person such
as a soka or a dewa who teaches others mantras for purposes of divining; pass. verb to become a guru
*guru bir a powerful guru bonga, q.v. (also see bir)
*guru bonga a spirit who is served by a guru (2nd meaning of guru) and who in turn instructs and inspires the guru who serves him guru (गुरु) a field rat
guru baba paddy grains stored up by a field rat in its burrow *guru chadlom dumbu a plant
which gives off a sap which is put on fresh wounds causing a smarting sensation and which is believed to work as a disinfectant guru herte: earth thrown up by a burrowing field rat
135
guru(ken) (गुड़) - the sound of a gun going off; a like sudden loud noise (with verb sari, etc.)
*guru-guru(tan) making a loud rumbling noise, e.g. of thunder, or of the feet of running animals, e.g. buffalos (with verb sari, etc); to stare for sometime at someone or something (with verb nel, med)
güru (गृह) unrefined sugar *güru danda sugarcane, Saccha rum officinarum, L., Gramineae, B.139/36, Η. 139/54/2
gurubar (गुरुवर) Thursday (also gurbar)
guruń (गुरुङ) a deep dark colour e.g. of ripe grains, of the seeds of certain fruits such as the custard apple or watermelon, of dark green grass
gurur(ken) (गुहर)- the sound of a gun going off (a louder sound than guruken) (with verb sari, etc.) gururuń (गुरु) - an eagle
gus, gusu (जूस गूस) a bribe, to bribe gusa (गुसा) - to punch with a straight motion
*gusa-etol to make a fist threat ening to strike someone (wihtout actually striking him) gusam (गुसम) the tiny close hairs
on e,g, a caterpillar or the itika plant *gusam : a name given by some to the dora :, q.v.
*gusam chidu a caterpillar with very numerous brown hairs which cause itching when touched
*gusam hesa: a tree of the hesa: family with pubescent (hairy) fruit which has a mouldy (bau) appearance, prob. Ficus infectoria. Roxb., var. Lambertiana, King..
Moraceae, E.Μ., H.125/8/76 *gusam puru - an erect symmetri- cal herb 8-24 inches high with small white flowers dotted with purple.
This plant is used for snakebite. Andrographis echioides, Nees., Acanthaceae, B.104/2, H.104/31/2 gusam sanga a hairy climber
with purple and green flowers and edible tubers, Ceropegia hirsuta, W. & A., Asclepiadaceae, H.90/22/2, B.90/3
gusi (गुसि) to lift up with the hand part of e.g. a cloth to see what is underneath; to push aside with the hands e.g. leaves, straw to see what is underneath
gūsi (भूमि) cowdung in its dried-out state (guri: fresh cowdung) gusiya (गुसिया) land owner; master of the house or of a region
guți (गुटि) a group, band, team
*mi guți together in one group guți (e)a 'lota' (also called muta) guți (गुटि) malchi/marchi a black pepper gutu (बुबु) to prick, pierce e.g. with
a needle; to string gutu-undi to string many together, e.g. fish
gutu (गुरु) a hillock *gutupi in the direction of a
hillock, (sometimes used for (going for) a bowel movement (also biärpä and birpa)
guturud (गुतुण्ड) oe a bird which makes a guturud-guturud sound, heard often in the jungles; the Large Green Barbet
guwa (गुवा) daru the betel nut tree, Areca catechu, L., Palmaceae, B.137/1, H.137/2/1
guyu (गुयु) a temporary hut, esp. that which is made to guard the paddy stored on the threshing floor (see also chapara)
*guyu lipi (oe) a kind of lipi bird which makes a domed nest, prob. the Bush Lark (see lipi oe)
