278
-p- The reciprocal infix (the
reciprocal of any verb can be formed by infixing the reciprocal marker p-after the first vowel of a verb root and then repeating that vowel after the-p- If this first vowel is long, it retains its long quality only after the -p-infix (Les 23); a-p- infix is also used in a few superlatives, e.g. maparań, hupuriń, jtpiliń; also a -p- infix is used in a few terms implying relationship, e.g. eperate, his wife', hopon, seped (prob. from sød as in sed)
hon -pa (पा) an affix indicating an approximate place (-ta: would indicate an exact place)
pa: () the sound made when shooting an arrow; to shoot an arrow making this sound
pa: (पाः) to chop (wood)
*pa:-ro- to chop and allow to dry out (wood)
pacha:-puchu: (पचः-पुकुः) of many small animals or the like, to slip off in all directions; of a person, to slip off so as to avoid doing some work pachar (पचर ) a small wedge put when needed between a wooden wheel and the covering iron rim (hal) of a bullock cart
pacharad (पचाड ) to clear grass from a section of land pachari (पचारि) - to wall off by filling hamboos, twigs, etc. in with mud and leaves
*pachari-biyur to wall off (as in pachan)
*pachari owa: a house built up on all sides around a courtyard pachim (पश्चिम) West (from Hindi, better Ho would be singi hasur)
P
pachiya: (पक्रिय:) a small basket used for carrying soil, cowdung, etc. pachur (पापुर) to cause welts, by whipping, etc.
pachuri (पचुद्धि) of cattle, to fight against the goad (when beaten, etc. to merely turn the head to the side
and refuse to advance) pada (एवा) to kick backward (e.g of a four footed animal); of a cock, to strike at or hit with a foot stroke pada-to: to hit with a kick (as given under pada)
*pada-pada to swing or beat one's feet
padari (पदारि) a Christian priest or pastor
padar-pudur (पदर पुदुर ) - used as verbal affix to word ter-padar-pudur,
q.v. padcha-pulun (पड्या-पुलुङ) to
quickly slip by (under, over) another when fighting, (used of cock fighting
or of men wrestling); of a man to bob up and down in water
padki (पड़कि) a large poyla giving a measure of grain of about 2 seers *padki biyur-nam to divine by
having someone spin around sitting on a padki (often referred to merely as biyur-nam)
pad-ped (tan) (पड़-पेड़) the sound
made by many light fruits falling one after another onto the ground; of baby chickens, to fall over dead one
after another pad-pēd (पार्-पैड़) a trumpheting
sound made by elephants; of
elephants, to make such a sound padu (प) to defeat; adj. with sim or sandi, the losing cock in a fight;
to win or gain as the spoils of victory
padud (पदुड़) - same as padugad
padugad (पदुगड)- to kick something
back with the foot, used of a dog, cow, etc.
paga (पगा) a thick rope
paga-chora (पगाचोरा) to be or
turn cowardly (used of a cock who has lost his fighting spirit and no
longer wants to fight, and also of a bullock who is easily frightened)
pagala (पगाला) used of the state of a person in a trance (rum) or of an irrascible (kurkur) quarrelsome
(peton) person. (This is not used for a 'mad', 'crazy' person, for which
baya would be used) pagara (पगारा) a small golden ear-ring
pagun (पगुन) chandu: a month, the latter half of February and the
first part of March
paguwa (पगुवा)- of a rope, to be too thick for some intended purpose
pai (us) - a definite place; shortened for ärapai, the place where silkworm cultivation is done
*pai-bandon-a joint sacrifice made at the place of silkworm breeding to gain protection for the work
there paiki (पइकि) - used as poetic parallel
for porja, a subject (person)
*paiki-inuň a cho dance, q.v. *paiki oe a bird (Tickell called it
the Scarlet and Black Flycatcher)
pail/pail (पइल/पंहुल) used in term ayer pail, in the very beginning
(from Hindi pahila) *pail/päil utar in the very beginning
pair (इ) of a liquid, to overflow paiți (पइटि ) work; to work *paiţi-asul to support, provide sustenance by working
*paiți-laga fatigue due to work
279
paiţi-lagan to tire oneself by working
*paiţi-panați a general term for work (Les. 46)
paka (पका)- adj. - of solid material; to make something of solid material
pakila: (पा'किलः) jan shoulder
blade (see also rupi jan) pakoro (पकोड़ी) of the fruit inside
a pod (e.g. the sirimi plant or of the jojo tree), to be fully formed; of cattle, to be a fully developed age
(used in forms bugilekae: pakorotaziya or bugilekae: pakorowakana); some-times used of
men with the meaning 'to become fully developed/mature'
pakudan (पकुदज) a spontaneous welt-like eruption (caused by sickness)
pal (पाल) a ploughshare
pal-undu - the hole in the plough
into which the ploughshare fits
pala (पला) poetic parallel of koto,
a branch
palandu (पलंड) a kind of shrub and creeper of the jungle;
prob. Combretum decandrum, Roxb., Combretaceae, Ε.Μ., Β.62/4, H.62/5/1
palandu chidu a kind of cater-
pillar which feeds esp. on the palandu shrub. It is green and as
long and fat as a finger. There is a popular belief that these turn into fishes
palandu sum a parasite which forms on the palandu shrub pala:-pili: (पलः पिलिः) to flash on
and off, e.g. of the light given off by a firefly; shining, reflecting light (see
also pili:-pili:) palați (पलाटि)- a shrub with copious milk juice, and medium sized bluish
flowers. Different parts of this have

medicinal usages. Calotropis gigantea, Br., Asclepiadaceae, B.90/ 1, H.90/5/1
*palaţi chidu a caterpillar which feeds on the palați scrub. These are used for the cure of epilepsy
pali (पति) jețe very intense summer heat prolonged for a long time without rain.
palisi (पलिसि) to polish
palki (पलकि ) यः: an erect herb extensively cultivated as a vegetable, prob. Spinacia oleraceae, L. Chenopodiaceae, B.109/4, H.109/
3/1
palna (पलना) such and such; so and so (used when the speaker wants to avoid using or does not remember a name, a Hindi usage sometimes heard in Ho)
paltaw (पलटव) to change the position of something, e.g. of paddy sheaves laid out for threshing (baba tar) by turning up stalks not yet threshed
palţi (पलटि) to overturn something, to turn something over, e.g. gari palţiyana, 'the cart was overturned, palțitam, 'turn it over' palţiba (पलटिया) of paddy stalks after reploughing, to grow erect again
*palţiba-ura same as palțiba palton (पलटोन) a soldier
palu (पलु) a kind of very compact soil, good for making sundried bricks
*palu-gitila soil which is a mixture of sand and palu (as above)
*palu hasa same as palu palungad (पलुगड़) - of soil, in spite of having some moisture to be hard and difficult to plough
pampal (पम्पल ) - a butterfly; a moth
280
pan (पा'न) pan (betel leaves prepared with certain ingredients for chewing)
pan (पड) of the front part of the head, to be hairless, used as below:-
*pan bo: to have the part above the forehead extending toward the crown of the head bald
*pan saman to have a high forehead (less bald then pan bố:)
pana (पना) the part in the hair; a fork in a road *hora pana a place where a road
divides into two roads
panarom (पनारोन) a crossing; a place for passing over to, e.g. a gate
(verbal noun of parom)
pancha (पंचा) tax, rent
panchaiti (पंचाइति) to prop up one end of a large flat object (eg. a plank,
a burial stone) *panchaiti-rakab to lift to prop up (as given above)
pandaiti (पंडाइति) some suffering or harm supposedly caused by the envy or ill-dispositions of others. (bonga-era: is resorted to in order
to neutralize this) pandarai (पंडारह) daru see panrai
daru pandari (पंडारि)- a variety of white
ant (also pandir, q.v.) pandil (पडिल) to rebound after falling
pandir (पंडिर ) - a white-ant type of termite which attacks plants; poetic
parallel of lungam, 'silkworm panditi (पडिति) - a scholar; a learned man
pandoe (पंडोए) a white pumpkin,
Benincasa cerifera, Savi., Cucurbita- сене, В.71/1, H.71/10/1
pand-pend(tan) (पांइ-पेंड)- the sound of a horn of a car, the sound of a flute being played
pandra (पंजरा) of the colour of hair, paddy, etc., to be a light yellow (between pundi and chambara) pandu (is) of the hair, to turn grey; of leaves, to fade, turn yellow (e.g because dried out or diseased)
*pandu bíń a cobra *pandu bo: grey haired
*pandu bur-bur completely grey haired to be
*pandu nagu/nago bin a cobra
*pandu sakam oe a bird which has the colour of faded (yellow)
leaves *pandu-uju: to become progress-
281
ively more grey panduka (gam) putam the Ring
Dove
panged-penged (पंगेड़-पेंगेड्) a flash of light now here, now there; many flashes of light on and off
pangui (पंगुर) a feast (used in the collective noun porob-pangui and in expressions such as mage pangui, otherwise not used alone)
pangura (पंगुरा) bonga a spirit believed to be the wife of maran bonga, and hence sometimes called pangura buri
panja (पंजा ) - to track; to follow the traces (e.g. of shot animal by
footprints or by blood shed) *panja-nam- to find or get by tracking; to track down
panjari (पंजारि) the crossbars
joining the shafts of a cart paznji (पंजि) - to try to find out (e.g. the whereabouts of a lost object) by divining
*panji-nam- same as panji *panji-nel to see (e.g. one's palm) as a means of divining pankira
(किरा) the yearly wage given to dakuwas, lohars, etc. (e.g.
eight or so bundles or rice). Besides
this lohars can also get chaul for work done as it is done, e.g. ter-nala (pay for beating ploughshares etc.
into shape). If he is paid only once a year this is called bortan; to collect
such a wage pankira (पंकिडा) the small iron
clip put into the axle of the wheel of a cart so that the wheel will not come off
Panloyra (पनलोयडा) Pallahara, an area to the west of the southern
part of Keonjhar Dt., Orissa pan-pon (tan) (पड-पोड) of many
embankments, to break with large gaps, e.g. due to flood waters (used
with verb rapud or the like). panrai (पनरद्द ) daru a tall jungle
tree which attains 7-8 ft. girth. Its flowers are white with yellow
anthers. It has a pod about 4-8 inches long. Albizzia procera, Benth., Mimosaceae, B.55/15, H.55/
10/2 (also called pandarai daru) panti (पति) side by side; to be in
line side by side; sometimes used in prayers as poetic parallel with leka,
to count', q.v. *pantire in a line side by side; in
line with, e.g. diuri pantire, in line with the village priest', mi pantire, in the same row side by side'
panyar/payar (पायार) the long side piece of a rope-bed; some use
this for the short side also, others call the short side opandi or upandi pap (पाप) sin
pap-ichito cause to sin; to give scandal
*pap udub to confess one's sin
*pap-udub sanskar the sacrament of confession (now more
commonly called sola-uranteya:
sanskar)

papa (पपा') daru a jungle tree, the fruit of which is appreciated by bears, Gardenia latifolia, Aiton, Rubiaceae, B.77/7, H.77/12/6 282
pa:-pa: (पःपः) the sound of clapping the hands together
papari (पपारि) old (when used of persons, it is used in the sense of one who has been in some place or some occupation for a long time. See ham, old in age (of men); to become
old
*papari tonol-kaji the old covenant; the Old Testament (of the Bible)
paparu (पपाडु) a competition, e.g. susun paparu, a dancing competition (recip. of paru, to defeat')
papated (पपाटेड) - to twist back on one another, to interfold, e.g the wing feathers of a chicken so as to prevent flying (recip. of pated)
pa-pê (-) - a sound made by a large number of bees or wasps coming quickly toward someone
papi (पपि) sinful para (पारा) to guard (better Ho would be horo)
para (us) to plant close together in a nursery; to crowd closely together in great numbers; a seedling for transplanting; in prayers sometimes used for sim para, q.v.
*para baba paddy seedlings grown in a nursery para (पड़ा) a portion of some thing divided
*mi para one portion parae, paraye (पराए पत्राये) a dom esticated dove
parand-perënd(tan) (परांड-पेरेंड) a shrill sound made by elephants (also pend)
para-pari (पडा-पछि ) to do (get, etc.) something each one in turn para-patu (परा-पटु) same as para- putu, q.v.
para-pinda (पडा-पिडा) suffering or harm caused by such things as bad omen, witchcraft, curses and the like (people try to remove or neutralize this)
para-pirt (परा-पिरी) to shed tears (compare piril-piril, 'to shed tears for some time')
para-purti (परा-पुरु) of the eyes, to be only half open, e.g. of someone just awakening; of the eyes, to smart
and water e.g. due to smoke (for this also mo:-para-purti)
para-putu (परा-पुटु) - complicatedly intertwined, e.g. of brambles, knotted string
parar-purur (परुर-पुडर) one given to anger easily who then takes out his anger on those who annoy him
(fighting with them, etc.); to scratch the surface (see purur)
paraw (पडाव) to read; to study paraw sitiya a school child
parcha (परचा) land deeds
*parcha sakam land deeds
parchi (परचि) clean, pure, holy; to cleanse, to purify, to sanctify
* parchi dãe a holy victim #parchi dãe jom to consume (eat)
the holy victim; Holy Communion; to receive Holy Communion
* parchi dãe rakab to offer the holy victim; the holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
*Parchirowa the Holy Spirit
parak (परा'क) a frock (from English)
parchi-sapan to purify oneself clean (refl. form)
*parchi sengel holy fire;
purifying fire; purgatory *parchi sukurbar Good Friday
pari (परि) a fairy (Hindi, used in Ho stories)
pari (पाथि) of much water, to overflow an embankment paricha (परीचा) an examination
pari (पारि) hasu a sickness which occurs on alternate days paril (पहिल) same as pandil, q.v.
pariya (मड़िया) fallow; land left uncultivated; sleepless; to deprive of sleep (with med-dttm as object) i.e. in the sense of med-angara, to spend a sleepless night'
*pariya gora/pt fallow upland *pariya ote fallow land parka (परा) an open clear space; to make an opening
*parka-parka separated by an open space, e.g. two lines of dancers parkom (परकोम) a rope-bed (a form used in the North; around Chaibasa karkom is used)
parlanga (परलंगा ) - white patches over a good part of the body (as in barlanga, bangara); pass. verb of such patches, to develop; to have such patches
parla-pirli (परता-पिरलि) an adjective used of the eyes of spirits,
meaning not certain, but prob.
'sparkling' (as light reflected off smooth polished sharp object) parlu (परतु) - white patches on one's
skin (less extensive than bangara); pass. verb of such patches, to
develop; to have such patches *parlu-parlanga - a collective term for white patches on one's skin
parom (परीन) to cross over; to pass through e.g. a village; to
transfer (e.g. something from one
283
house to an-other); to pass some
time, e.g. din paromeyana, 'the day (time) passed', across (Les. 27)
par-pir(tan) (पर-पिर) of birds or men, to disperse, scattering in all
directions (with verb nir, etc.) par-pur (tan) (पर-पुर) the sound of many quails, etc., suddenly flying off (see pur(ken})
paru (परा) used with med, of the eyes to be bloodshot e.g from swimming too long or from drunkedness
paru () to defeat; defeated, e.g. of the losing cock in a fight *paru-era: to consign (give away)
to defeat (i.e. foolishly putting up a cock to fight when it is sure to lose) paru-uju: to return victorious (e.g. in a prayer to the ancestors, -
paru-uju:ańpe, 'bring it about for me that I may come victorious'
parub (पड़) to uproot; a bullying person (an angry person who is a law unto himself)
paruwar (पड़वर) bullying (see parub)
paruwar-peton cruel; cruelty pas (पास) to pass an examination
pas (प) a kind of paddy plant which when grown wildly produces
very little, and which when in a field is hard to recognize, and if not removed smothers other cultivated varieties, the wild variety of Oryza
sativa, L., Gramineae, B.139/27, H.139/33/1
pasa-poso(tan) (पसा-पोसो)- of soil, etc., to quickly disintegrate when touched
pasara (पसारा) to exchange one object for another; to bartere
pase (पसे) a trap; to trap
pase-goe: to kill by entrapping

pasid (पसिड) to cut out and offer in sacrifice some uncooked (berel) part (e.g. the liver) of an animal; sometimes used in prayers as parallel to ra, 'to untie', 'to release *pasid-era: same as pasid, used
in prayers parallel to ra-era: pasinjor (पसिंजोर) a passenger train
284
branch; as poetic parallel used in the sense of leaf, but also used as poetic parallel with bir in the sense of 'scrub jungle', (see also patara)
pata pandu oe a bird having the colour of leaves which have turned yellow
*pată ud- a species of edible mush- room which grows where fallen leaves are rotting
pata (पटा) dumbu a weed with a long red stem, also called pata tasad dumbu, and prob. the same as sadom
pata dumbu *paţa tasad dumbu - same as pata dumbu
pasir (पसिर) to spatter paska (पतका) of chickens, dogs, etc., to scratch or throw up earth with the feet
*paska-nam to find or get by throwing up earth with the feet (e.g. of a chicken searching for worms)
paska (पासका) porob - Easter pāsu (पा'सु) daru a tree with strong wood, Cleistanthus collinus, Benth., Euphorbiaceae, B.29/7, H.29/23/1
*pasu jaţa saplings of the pasu tree (when about 2 or 3 yrs. old) which are used for seneyor pasum (पसुम) to adhere to; to stick to; to become entangled in (e.g. weeds in a plough, threshed grains in straw)
pat (पाट) a guru bonga type of spirit, usually found in mountains and called upon by shamans (dewako, sokako) for help in bonga nam (discerning what spirit is causing some sickness, etc.)
*pat chelakiń two disciples of a guru who make ready the dip where the guru instructs his disciples and who light the two surite before a session when the guru will teach mantras to his
disciples pata (पता) - a leaf (see also sakam, which however is used esp. of leaves
from which pu:, kalgi, etc. are made); to put out leaves; a leafy
paţa: (पटः) to entwine (e.g. two ropes, two branches, a snake around a branch): to interlace; (as verbal
affix with sen see sen-pata:) pată (पटाँ) - a Mohammedan - (This word, originally meaning a Pathan,
is used for Mohammedans in general) patal, patal (पता'ल, पताल) the
nether-world, Hades patani (पतानि) see patni paţa-putu (पटा-पुड)- intricately
intertwined; of birds, etc., to struggle to escape from a traр making some noise; sometimes used in the same meaning as parar-putur (q.v.), 'one easily given to anger' e.g. paţa-puţu-lekanko, 'people easily given to anger'
patara (पताडा) a scrub jungle pataraiń (पतरसित्र) to slap or scold so as to make one smart (physically or in spirit)
Pataya (पटाया) Jagannathpur,
(referring to the local Mohammedan community, see paţă)
pataya (पटाया) biń a tree snake, moves quickly from branch to branch pate (e) a spoke of a cart wheel
paţe (पटे) nutum a nickname pated (पटेड्) quarrelsome; a trouble maker (also peton)
pated (पटेą) to have one's head, arm, foot twisted back in a deformed way (see also recip. papated)
pateya (पटेया) a grown she-goat, ewe, sow which has not yet had any
young ones pati (पति) a measure of grain, about two seers
285
*pati baba a one pati measure of
paddy paţi (2) bandage (Hindi)
patikar (पटिकर) a man who goes around with hooks and often photos, having gained some knowledge about a family hoping to wheadle money out of them
patka (पटका) ud- a kind of edible mushroom, pungent (had) in taste (also called had patka ud)
patki (पटकि) usd in prayers parallel to jati with the same meaning: a race, tribe, jat patni, patani (पत्नि, पतानि) the
female moth of the silkworm patra (पतरा) of a dish or plate, to be made of stone
*patra bela a bela made of stone *patra tare a plate made of stone patu (पटु) to wrap around *patu-biyur to wrap around *patu-mid to wrap around together
pațu (पटु) something gathered together in the shape of a ball (used perhaps only in the term madkam patu, q.v.)
patub (पटुन) an alternate form of parub, q.v. (both meanings)
*pațub-paruwar - bullying, cruel; cruelty, brutality
patud (पतुरु) a very contentious,
bothersome, quarrelsome person; to
slip out of a slot in which fixed, e.g. of a ploughshare slipping out of its
slot in a plough; for a bone to slip out e.g. from a piece of meat
patukam (पसुवाम) a large body of water, a sea (used in a prayer, not
used in ordinary conversation patura (पतुढा) to coalesce into a mass
patwar (पतवार) the rudder of a ship (Hindi, used in Ho translation)
paudar (पउडर) face powder paunten (पउनटेन) a fountain pen
pauri (पंउडि) a spirit who dwells in deep water
pauri churdu bonga a type of churdu bonga (q.v.) which resides
in deep water and swamps *pauri nage an important nage (q.v.) spirit
pauți (एउटि ) - to be abundant, very big, e.g. of a bandi
*mi pauţi very many (same as mi iya)
pawan bir (पवन बीर) used parallel to hanuman bir (q.v.) with the same
meaning (the Hindi word pawan, 'wind' is used in many epithets of Hanuman)
paya (पया) a pillar paya (पंयां) to clear up, e.g. the
sky after rain; a clearing or open space; to clear up a space e.g. of shrubs
payar (पांयर) see panyar pe:(ken) () the sound of a slap *pe:-pe:(tan) the sound of repeated slapping
pë: (:) strength; to strengthen, to exert strength; pass. to become
strong *pe:-achu to encourage; to inspire
strenght

*pe:-borsa encourage to embolden,
*pe:-ji to strengthen someone's spirit; to encourage; refl, to take courage
*pe:-leka to try to exert one's strength
*pe:-0:1 to exert strength
*pe:yan strong
*pe:yo:teya: sanskar the sacra ment of Confirmation
pechekar (पेचेलर) a spray gun; to spray
pecho (पेची) a small owl (more commonly called kokor)
ped(ken) (पेड़) the sound a fallen object has made, 'with a thud', used with verbs of falling; immediately, in an instant (used in this way with the imperative and in past tenses,
e.g. pedken seno:me, pedkene: seno:yana
pēd (पैड्) a shrill sound made by an elephant (a loud trumpheting sound would be põ)
286
pedka (पेड़‌का ) ba: of the head, to be such that the hairs are coming out only short and sparsely, e.g. of one who has lost his hair due to some sickness
pego:-pego: (रेगी पेना) the call of a peacock
peja (पेणा) used in term hon peja, 'father and son', not used alone peje (पेजें ) med to have white matter coming out of the side of the eyes, e.g. of a sick person, a drunk (in which case the term is used to
ridicule him) pel (पेल) to fail (from English)
pelse: (पलसेः) of rain, to fall very lightly, e.g. pelse:ge: gamaetana, it is raining very lightly'
penda (पंचा) inun to shoot a
marble by holding it against the upper inside part of one finger, which is then pulled back by the other hand and released
penged(ken) (पेंगेड) of a light source, to give off a short gleam of light
*penged-penged(tan) of a light source, to give off successive short gleams of light, e.g. a fire-fly penţe (पेटे) pants; to wear pants pentor, pentor (पेनटोर, पैनटोर) το twist e.g. one's arm, neck, a cow's tail
pëpë () noise made by the buzzing of bees, flies, etc.
pepo (पेपणे) to spread something thickly, e.g. birdlime on a branch, food on one's face (see ab-pepo) pepse (पेपसे) mad a kind of bamboo with a wide hole in the
centre. This can grow as high as 70 ft. Bambusa tulda, Roxb., Gramineae, H.139/3/1, B.139/7. From these flutes are made. pere: (पेरे) full; to fill
*pere:-pair to fill to overflowing pere (पेड़े) kuid a kite which catches field mice and lizards. It is smaller than the ordinary kuid, and
somewhat like a bisiri pere: (s) to break off with one
or both hands, e.g. a small branch, a wing of a bird; to twist the tail; pass. to have one's hand (arm) or foot (leg) broken or fractured; of an animal to have the leg broken or fractured
*pere:-baţi to cause one to roll around in a fit
pere:-chowa: to break off a part (sometimes used threateningly, e.g. pere:-chowa:meyań, 'I'll break you to pieces)
287
*pere:-goe: to kill by snapping, eg an animal by breaking its neck *pere:-latum to break making
fold over *pere:-rapud to break off (as in
pere:) pere: () poetic form of pe,
strength peregar (पेड़ेगर) bullying
perend () the trumpet used by Gasis; of an elephant, to make a loud shrill sound; to make a long
shrill sound with a flute perepiyun (पेजेपियुड) the Grey headed Myna bird (a local name. In some areas called baripiyun)
perete (पेरेंटे) a parade pero: (पेको)- an egg; the male organ (N.B. not the testacles, at least as used near Chaibasa). When used for
the male organ it is not considered a vulgar word, but because of this usage it is rarely now used for egg, and is so only when some word like sim is affixed
perpende, perponde (पेरडे, पैरपोंडे) - alternate forms of porponde, q.v. pertol (पेस्तोल) of the mouth, to be dirty from food, or to be disfigured by wounds
peseń-peseń (tan) (पेसेज-पेसेज) of water, blood, etc., to ooze out slowly (with verb lingi, etc.)
peskar (पेसकर) the official who
lays petitions, etc. before the magistrate peso (पेसो) of the beard, mous
used to refer to the pubic hairs peso a mouth surrounded by a thick beard
peţă (पेटा) a heifer (young cow) at the stage when it has about two to four teeth
petaru (पेताड़) - a jungle sanga, very bitter (mer), must boil in. water before it can be eaten
pete: (पेटे) same as pere:, to break off, q.v.
peţe: (पेट) empty paddy grains; of rice grains, to be empty, figur. a daughter
pete: baba empty paddy grains peţe: (पेट) daru - a small tree with white flowers in clusters, prob. Ixora parviflora, Vahl., Rubiaceae, B.77/
12, H.77/14/2 petechare (पेटेचोड़े) of fish or cattle, to struggle to free oneself
petel-petel (पेटेल-पेटेल) to shake slowly, e.g the tail of a fish wiggling around in water
pete-pete(tan) (पेते-देते) in a great
number together, with verb of being present, coming, going, etc. e.g. burdudko pete-petetanko d:la,
'flying ants come out in great
numbers'; (used esp. of smaller animals, such as birds, fish, flying ants)
twist a pete-pete (वेटे-बेटे)- )to feather rapidly in the ear; of a dying
chicken or man, to quiver
peto (पेतो) of the mouth, to be covered with some edible, milk, diyan, etc.
peto a mouth covered as given under peto
tache, to be very thick, e.g. peso tange: dariyakana 'he has a heavy
beard'; to put too much salt, sasan, marchi in some food; of grass, weeds, etc., to be very thick
in a field,e.g. ote dumbute peso-wakana, peso is sometimes quarrelsomenessf
peton (पेतोङ) quarrelsome;
peto: (पेटो) an alternate form of
pero:, q.v.

petpariya (पेटपडिया) the colour of a chicken, red with white dots pēyae (पेचाएर) a member of a weaving caste; to become socially
defiled, e.g. by child birth *pēyae lija: cloth made by a pēyae
peyaji (पेयाजि) an onion, Allium cepa, L. Liliaceae, B.145/1, H.145/
11/5
pr (पी) a field, maidan *pi dundu a large owl, a bit
smaller than the gara dundu: makes a hū-hū sound
*pt horo a land tortoise
*pi kandar the site of one's upland fields
*pt karob a small crab found in upland fields
*pt ko: the Cattle Egret (also called pundi ko:)
*pl sira: the sira: bird, the Pipit picha: () to pluck out with the nails of the thumb and forefinger or with pincers
pichu (पिचु) - a large fly, bites cattle, found esp. during the monsoon (also called rawom)
pichu (पिचु) med eyes which are small and barely opened (used sometimes in scolding elephants)
pidió-pidiń (पिदिज-पिदिস)- to swing one's feet (esp. of children)
pidla (पिड्ला ) - of something falling, to rebound; of something hit, pushed, etc., to be projected pid-poron (पिड-पोडोज) -the sound made by the chepor bird; the chepor bird (sometimes so called
because of the sound) pigoro-pigoro (पिगोडो-पिगोडो) the sound made by the chepor bird (also pikoro)
pika (पिका) a large home-made bidi; to make a pika
288
pika-jom to provide oneself with a pika
pikoro, pikro (पिकोड़ो, पिकड़ो) a sound made by the chepor bird pila (पिला) the spleen; pass. -to have an enlarged spleen
pii: (पिलिः) to reflect light, e.g. with a mirror; to feel the glare of reflected light
*pili:-pili: the same of a continued or repeated action
*pili:-pili: jete the intense heat e.g. a 1-2 P.M. on a very hot day
when the air seems to oscillate
pil/pt:l-pingad(tan) (पील/पील-रिंगढ़) of one seriously sick, to start (beten)
repeatedly in a restless fashion pil-pingad hatir churdu - в
churdu bonge (q.v.) which causes sudden very severe and dangerous sickness
pilui: (पिलुइः) oe the hon oe, q.v., (so called near Khuntpani and in the North)
pimpuri (पिनपुडि ) ja - the fruit of the rali herb, used as medicine for T.B. and bronchitis
pinchi (विधि) a cluster of peacock feathers tied together (in the term mara: pinchi)
pinda (पिंदा) a dhoti (esp. of a village type); to wear the same; to put on a gamcha
pindi (f) the land bordering
some body of water, a river, pond, etc.
pindigi (विडिति) a small veranda- type elevation built in the front of a house
*pindigi-biyur - to build the lower part of the wall of a house so that it juts out at least a few inches all around the house (so as to
strengthen the lower part of the wall from erosion due to rain water, etc.)
pind-pind (पी-पी) to sound a
horn e.g. of a car (see pand-pond of
a deep sound of a horn)
pingad(leka) (पिंगड्) same as pengad, q.v.
*pingad-pingad same as pengad pengad
pingae: (form) a flash of bright light
repeated flashes of bright light
289
* pingae:-pingae:
pinicha: (विनिधः) pliers, pincers,
tweezers (verbal noun of picha:) piniyud (विनियुर) a Munia bird,
esp. the Spotted Munia (also called pirid)
pinsil (पिनसिल) a pencil
pipa chuguyud (पीपा' चुगुयु) a
sound made by a bird, perhaps by the sun danchu:
pipi (पिपि) a chicken (baby talk) *pipi-pipi a call to chicken to
come e.g. to get their food pir(ken) (पिर) the sound of a small
bird taking flight
*pir-pir(tan) - the sound of many small birds or flying ants taking flight; the sound of a tender leaf
shaking in the breeze; of light leaves
or fruit, to fall spinning or weaving (with verb iyu:, etc. See also ber-ber)
pira (पिड़ा) affliction, suffering ( from Hindi, not used in ordinary
conversation, but used in term kapo pira (q.v.) and pira-panda and ma pira as given below) *pira-panda severe suffering
caused through witchcraft (karo
banai, etc.) (a term used in prayers in connection with karo pira, panda
is not used independently)
*ma pira a term used in prayers
for great affliction caused by witch- craft (ma perhaps from Hindi maha,
'great'); to cause such affliction
pirae:-parae:(tan) (पिराएः पराएः) -
of the atmosphere, to become
perfectly clear, e.g. after a rain (with
verb payā)
piri (पिरि) daru a small very prickly tree with thick corky bark, Erythrina subrose, Roxb., Papilion-
aceae, B.53/55, H.53/48/3 piri (पिरि) hasu sickness in
which the skin and eyes turn yellow
and the urine becomes a deep yellow,
jaundice piri (নিকি)- poetic form of pl, 'a
maidan'; sometimes used for pir, an area under one manki
piri:(leka) (विरिः) sparkling, e.g.
of a scrubbed eating-vessel or of a freshly sharpened knife
*piri:-piri:(tan) same as piri:(leka)
pirid (पिरीस्) - to open the eyes only partially
*pirid med one with only half opened eyes
pizid (पिडीड्) oe - a small bird, many
flock together, make big nests in which several mothers raise their
little ones, perhaps the Spotted Munia or possibly the Whitebacked
Munia pirnd-pirid the sound made by the pirid bird
piril-piril(tan) (पिरिल-निरिल) to shed tears for some time (with verb
ra:) piriya (पिड़िया) an oil cake, i.e. the
remainings after oil has been squeezed out of some seed, this is eaten by cattle (also kae)
piriyun (पिरियुड) of rays of sunshine, to come through between
clouds for a brief time, esp. as a
rainfall in coming to an end, or sometimes in a break in a rainfall

*piriyun-piriyuna call of the rami (common Myna) bird, supposedly uttered during a long rainfall when the rain is about to clear up
pirkal (पिरकल)- one who performs with a sword at a sword dance (e.g. at the time of jan-topa)
pirkalan (पिरकलड)- used in prayers parallel to bad, presumably with the same meaning as bad
pirsuli: (पिरसुलिः) med one with only half opened eyes (also pirid med)
pisab (पिसब) urine; to urinate (from Hindi, the proper Ho work is duki)
*pisab da: urine (also da: sunum, people would be less shy to use these than duki in front of mixed company)
pisi: (विसिः) same as piski:, q.v. *pisi:-nam -same as piski:-nam, q.v.
pisi: (पिसिः) bindi daru a shrub with tiny red flowers with yellow eyes, and leaves varying from green to dark red in colour. Some places called jenga bindi daru or tepse bindi daru. Jatropha gossypifolia, L. Euphorbiaceae, B.29/24, H.29/2/3 (the term bir bindi daru is used by some for this tree and by others for
another smaller tree) pisika (पिसिका) ko: see piska ko: pisika (पिसिका) sanga see piska sanga
pisi:-pirae (पिसि. पिराए) kula a large spotted panther or leopard pisir-pisir (पिसिर-पिसिर) to drizzle (also pusur-pusur)
piska (पिसका) ko: the Paddy Bird (an egret which appears to be brown when at rest but when it flies its
290
white wings and tail show)
piska (पिसका) sanga a kind of tuber. If immediately boiled it is very bitter. It should be left in running water overnight and then boiled. Dioscorea bulbifera, Linn.,
Dioscoreaceae, H.152/1/8, var. pulcella, B.152/8
piski: (पिसकिः) to push aside with the fingers, e.g the sheath of a
maize cob to see how far it has developed, the hairs to look for lice "piski:-nam to look for by an
action as given under piski: pīt, piti (पीत, पीति) - bile
*pit bamal-a sickness having bile
disturbance and some rash *pit/piti hasu sometime used for malaria
pita (पिता) a hair ribbon; a tape pital (पितल) brass of a kind that
shines when polished
piti (पिति) poetic parallel for sala, 'to select' (used in prayers)
piti (पति) see pīt, piti aboveun
piți (पिटि) a bamboo box
piţi diri a stone in the shape of
a bamboo box (such as the one on the Barkela-Saedba road before
reaching Petapiti) pitid (पिलिम्) of a falling object, to
rebound, of an animal (e.g. a grass- hopper, a hare, a wild boar), to bound or spring; to splatter water,
e.g.by throwing it with one's extended fingers
*pitid-ol- to bound or rebound out pitid-uju: to come bounding
piti-piti (पिति-पित्ति) of flying ants, fish, to come one after another
quickly in great numbers pitu (पिटु) of hair, to curl up
pitu a: a kind of edible jungle herb pitu bo: curly haired
*pitu dali a broad, low-set crest
of a cock (cf. muli dali an erect crest)
*pitu gurud same as pitu bō: *pitu patni a female moth with only partially formed wings
*pitu-pitu curled (of hair)
piya-pankiya(tan) (पिया-पंकिया) of rain, very heavy (so as to fill fields
with water) but for a short time as distinct from japud which is used of a prolonged heavy rain, used with
the verb gama, e.g. piya pankiyatane: gamakeda, 'there was
a cloud-burst piyun (पियुन) a kind of creeper
291
with an edible herb resembling a string bean but about 1 ft. long, Canavalia ensiformis, DC., Papilion-
aceae, H.53/44/1, B.53/15. (Haines
calls this the Sword Bean)
po: (ken) (प) a dull sound made by an object, such as a lizard, falling
(with verb iyu: etc.) pő (पो) - twenty ganda (groups of 4
each), therefore 80, used esp. of counting cocoons
põ (प) a loud hiss of a snake; a trumpeting sound made by an elephant
*po-po- the same of a continued or repeated action
pocha (पणेचा) to let escape, to miss; to escape (Les. 27)
*pocha-o:l to escape out pocho (पोचो ) to push back the outer skin, e.g. of a kula sanga in order to release the tuber; to stretch
back the foreskin of the male organ *pocho-era: same as pocho pochora (पोचोड़ा) whitewash, to whitewash
pochowate (पोधोवात्ते) by force, by violence
pode (पोदे) an ornament worn
hanging from a string around the neck
pode (पोदं) duki same as podo duki
podo (पोदो) same as podo duki *podo duki human semen
podoga (पोदोगा)- to rot away inside with at least most of the exterior
surface still intact (used esp. of wood, but can be used of stalks of plants or even of human bones which are thought to decay interiorly by
certain sicknesses or by drinking too much arki. Soya indicates also exterior rotting
podola (पोदोला) used in saying papari podola jom, meaning to eat one's old (one or more years old) rice
stock (stored in bandis) podol-podol(tan) (पोदोल पोदोल) to
rain lightly (more than a drizzle, used with verb gama or the like)
poe: (पोएः) to eject water from the mouth, to rinse the mouth; of egrets
and ducks, to defecate (used with
-ken and the verb ii:, e.g. ko: poe:kene: ii:keda)
poed (पोएड)- to shoot poed-piyan (पोएड् पियड) the name
of a bird, remains usually in a thick forest and makes a poed-piyan
sound, the Indian Pitta poe:-poe: (पोए-पोएः) of a place, to
be very slippery, e.g. a wet river bank
poeta (पोरता) the sacred thread worn by Brahmins
poga (पांगा) ud- a tiny mushroom growing out of a dead or rotting tree; a mushroom growing at the
base of a tree. In this latter case poga
ud is used preceded by the name of the tree, e.g. uli poga ud, koronjo

poga-ud, madkam poga ud. The above mentioned mushrooms are eaten, however the mushrooms of some trees are not edible, e.g. mtür poga ud
pojo (पोजो ) daru a small ever
green tree, the powdered bark of which is applied to wounds or bruises, Litseae polyantha, Juss. Lauraceae, B.115/2, H.115/2/2
pola (पोला) a ring pon (पोड)- to break open e.g. the top of an ant-hill (bunum) (see also ton)
*pon dubui-said in jest of a small child whose underpants are torn
revealing his buttocks ponai (पौनाइ ) (chandu:) the full moon; pass. verb of the moon, to be full
ponami (पोनामि) the full moon pondo (पीडो) a blazing torch
*pondo sengel a blazing torch pand-pand (पाँइ पाँड्) - a deep sound of a horn of a car; to blow a horn of a car making a loud sound (see also pind-pind)
pondro (पोन्दरो)- fifteen (Uriya, not commonly used in Ho but sometimes used in sayings or riddles to denote an indefinite large number)
pong (पोगा) - to burst or cut open *ponga-barato burst or split into two approximately equal parts pongad (पोगड्) - a kind of jungle vine, two varieties:-
*biń pongad not edible
*jome pongad a variety with edible leaves and flowers pongor (पॉगोर) to break out into a bright flame, e.g. embers after having been blown into
*pongor-pongor the same of a continued or repeated action
292
ponka (पॉका) an opening e.g. between trees in a jungle; to make an opening (e.g. by clearing a path);
figur. of an epidemic or of a malign spirit through an epidemic, to deplete (make a hole in) the population, e.g. juguni bonga hatu sai: ponka-ideya, 'The juguni spirit
will progressively deplete (through epidemics) the population of the village'
ponka-ponka with space in between
po-po (पो-पो) of soap, to lather po:-po: (पो-पोः) a flat, dull sound made by hitting against e.g. a cracked earthen pot or a damaged
drum po-pō (प-पॉ) of a snake, to hiss repeatedly
popoe: (पोपोए ) a birdlime made from the sap of the lowa tree or of the hesa: tree
popo-popo (पणेपो-पोपो)- one of many sounds ascribed to the obor bird por(ken) (पोर) the sound made by a match being ignited (with verb 1:r); the sound of something quickly tearing (with verb chacha:, etc. See also por bangol)
pora (पोड़ा) intestines
*pora ipil a: a name given to ipil a: q.v., when distinguishing it from ara: ipil a:
*pora lai: the large intestines pora kuid the Common Parish Kite (also called merely kuid)
pora (पोड़) to skin; to take off some of the skin; to scrape off some
of the surface e.g. of a plastered wall poran (पोरङ) to be badly wounded e.g. by a fall, esp on the forehead, elbow, knees and nose (implies
more serious wounds than poro would)
293
*poran sud a waterhole outside
the village used only by women not yet purified after childbirth
por-bangol (पर-यगेल) a sound of
something tearing very quickly por-bosi (पोर-बोसि) a refugee pare (पोडे) - of the eye, to be white, to have a cataract
porestar (पोरेसटर) a forester parja (पोरजा ) - a landless person; a subject e.g. of a king, of God (often connotes poverty and/or dependence)
*porja hon a subject or a poor person (used in prayers sometimes in parallel with randi hon, q.v., or sometimes in the term munda hon porja honko, prob. meaning 'the rich and the poor'; see also kantar hon,
ganda hon)
*porja-paikiko a collective noun for subjects, used in prayers porka (पोरका) a particular bird, some suggest the Shama
porkar (पोराणकार ) - used in terms such as esu porkar, 'of many kinds', saben porkar, 'of all kinds' (Hindi-prakar, kisum in also used in this way. Better Ho would be kili-mili) *esu porkarte by many different means
porla (पोरला) a special arrow used for fishing porman (परमान) proof, to prove
off. Children make arrows out of
these
*poro sengel used in prayers in parallel with bor sengel, q.v., taking
on that meaning
poro (पोरो) to cause wounds, esp. on the knees, elbow, forehead, e.g. by beating someone (tam-poro);
pass. to receive such wounds, e.g. by falling or being beaten
poro (पारो)- the part of the ipil a: (q.v.) which remains after the part used for making rope has been
stripped off *poro mail the stem of the ipil
bush with the outer surface stripped
paro (पोडी) of the eye, to so become
diseased that the whole eye becomes opaque and protrudes (cf. pore); of
grains, to start to form, but in a mouldy, whitish deformed manner
poro med a diseased eye with the whole eye opaque and protruding porob (पोरोब ) a feast; refl. to observe a feast
porob basi the day after a feast *parob guri: the day before the main day of a feast when the courtyards etc. are cleaned with cowdung (guri:)
*porob pangui a collective noun for feasts
*porob ponai same as porob
pangui
pororm (पोडोम) a small bundle (e.g. of rice taken as karcha for a trip,
the leaf bundle made by red ants,
etc.); to wrap in a small bundle (the form potom is also used. For a bigger bundle puruwa or puțuwa is used) *porom-kesed - to block
something inside a small bundle, e.g. silkworm eggs inside a leaf- envelop (kuli)
*potom kobi cabbage (also puţuwa kobi. q.v.)
porom-kul to send wrapped up
in a small bundle
põroso (पौड़ोसो) a jackfruit (also
põso), Artocarpus integrifolia, L., Moraceae, B.125/1, H.125/7/3
parowal (पोरोवल) of the face or body, to be covered with dust,
powder, etc., e.g. of children playing, also used in joking of a girl who puts
too much powder on her face

porowań (पोरोवड) same as poran porponde (पोरपोडे) to cover (pass, be covered) with ashes, dust, or some whitish powder
po:r-por (पोर-पोर) to incessantly scold, to nag (also botor-botor)
porsa (पोरसा) a second serving of food or drink
posa (पोसा) to breed, give birth; to multiply, to increase capital (money or grain) by trade or by interest; of water, to increase e.g. in a tank
po:sa (पोःसा) of one's body, to appear to be well built, but actually to be weak (of men, sometimes used of chickens)
pāso (पाँसो) - a jackfruit (also põroso, q.v.)
pota (पोटा) a document showing ownership of land
*poţa sakam a written document proving ownership of
land poța (पाटा) intestines (also pora) pota: (पोटः) to skin; scrape off
one's skin (also pora:) *pota: porla (पोटः पौरला) daru a shrub which grows about 10-12 ft. high from the bark of which a rope is made. Its wood is used for fencing potaw (पोटाव) to have no desire to eat (because hunger is sated, etc.
ador has much the same meaning) poto (पोतो) baby talk for human excrement (also dage)
poto (पोटो) a photo
poto: (पोटो) a particular small tree or large shrub, Randia dumetorum, Lamk., Rubiaceae, B.77/28, H.77/13/2
*poto: jo the fruit of the poto: tree or shrub. This is used for poisoning fish
294
potoe: (पोटोए) to extract with great exertion e.g. the lama: jan from its pod, or kae remaining in an oil kuli after the oil has been squeezed out; to extract or wangle money out of someone.
potoka (पोटोका) a swelling in the sole of the foot which is very painful and which makes the skin around the swelling white. People believe that this is caused by
stepping on the egg shells of black chickens
potoke: (पोटोके)- a puffball, an edible fungus much like a mushroom (treated as animate)
*potoke: biń a thin tree snake,
something like a pațāya biń, with eyes almost invisible or glazed over.
If it bites there is a pain, some swelling and a wound may develop, the Common Brown Tree snake or the Gamma snake (Dipsadomorphus trigonatus)
potom (पोटोम) a small bundle; to wrap in a small bundle (same as porom, q.v.)
potom kubi cabbage (also puțuwa kobi, q.v.)
poto-poto (tan) (पोलो-पोती) of stool, to come out loose with some noise (with verb ii:)
potor pinda (पोतोर पिंदा) used together with Kamurdes (Käwordes),
q.v., prob. refers to the name of some site within Kamurdes
powa (पोवा) a measuring vessel; used as poetic parallel of punji in
the sense of to increase in numbers powa (पोवा) -poetic parallel of lungan, a silkworm, a cocoon. In
the phrase ära tala, powa tala, this would take on the meaning of
silkworm breeding
dum
powa: (पोट) to break open, e.g. a coconut, a fruit, a chațu (the form kowa: is also used)
powae (पोवाए) of the eyes, to see
in a blurred fashion; to cause one to see thus; hende powae...pundi powae used in prayers in the same way as hende powasi...pundi
powasi, see powasi
*powae-powae the same of a continued state (sometimes with
resulting dizziness) powal (पंवल ) - to be spread over a
wide ares, e.g. grazing cattle, silkworms on trees.
powań (पोयज) to have a part broken off, e.g. of a chatu, an
embankment, a tooth powasi (पोवासि) a mist, a fog; of a
spirit, to send mist or fog upon someone, e.g. in a prayer made to
spirits, merape hende-powasikowa, merape pundi-powasikowa, may
you send no fog upon them' (hende and pundi are not used literally here, but for purpose of poetic
parallel with a notion of collectivity); pass, - to be overtaken by fog or mist
(pukad, q.v., implies a thicker fog) *powasi kesed to block by mist or fog
*powasi-topa - to completely cover with fog
stump of a shrub (e.g. a pasu jața)
with the blunt part of an axe
*pil-nam to find or acquire by uprooting (as under ptt) (used in
parallel with amin-nam to refer to the original clearing of the jungles
to start cultivation pt() to regain one's physical
strength after a sickness which has caused one to waste away
pu-nam same as pū *pitura same as pl
pu(ken) () a sound of something falling or hitting against something with a thud
*pl-pu(tan) the same of a repeated action
pu:(ken) (3) of some object falling
or hitting against another object, to make a dull thud sound (a lighter sound than pu(ken) implies) (with
verb sari, etc.) *pu:-pu:(tan) the same of a repeated action
ptt: (q) a leaf cup; to make a leaf cup
puchu: (yy) to pass or fall through some hole
*puchu: lungam a silkworm which has fallen from a cocoon
which it was making pud(ken) (पु) to bound in an
instant through something (used with verbs of running)
poyla (पोयला) a measuring vessel poyo(leka) (पीयो) shining white (e.g. of moonlight)
*роуб-роуб prolonged state the same of a
poysa (पोयसा) pice, money; to earn or gain money
puda: (पुद) same as pudad, q.v.
pudad (पुदछ) a bush which has
developed fresh offshoots after pruning or trimming (see also chupad)
pudki (पुद्धि) a tiny fly which circles annoyingly around one's eyes; a sandfly
Prabhu (भु)- Lord (Hindi, usually pronounced parbu by uneducated
Hos or some say parbo)
puduna (पुदुना) a somewhat sour
ptt (1) to uproot by hitting the
edible herb, prob. as given in E.M.,

a variety of mint, Mentha sativa, L.,
Labiatae (H. note under 106/13/2) (a chutney is made from this, eaten esp. in the hot weather) pui (पु) a float attached to a
fishing line puid (पुहरु) used in prayers as poetic parallel with pasid, q.v., with the same meaning
296
vine, Luffa aegyptiaca, Hill., Cucur bitaceae, B.71/12, H, 71/11/3
pultu bia the flower of the pulta creeper, large opened eyes are sometimes compared to this.
*pulti chopathe inner part of a pultu which is thread-like and can be used for washing
*pultt med big wide-opened eyes (sometimes used in scolding) punchu (e) a panchayat
pundi (फुड) - white pundi diri hard white stones (somewhat resembling marbles) *pundi duki human semen (also
puka (पुका) a word used as poetic parallel with pampal (butterfly, moth) or in the term puka pampalko, a collective noun for locusts, butterflies and such flying insects (see also puka parae)
pukad (पुक) a fog (note dis- tinctions-pukador ugar a thick fog, powasi a mist or fog (eg. on a hill top); gandorae haze, esp. as seen on a hot summer's day)
puka parae (पुका पुराए) a locust (also uka parae)
puki (पुचिः) a cocoon after the silkworm has emerged
*puki lungam - same as puki (also lungam puki) pukud(leka) (कुकुर) - of one plough
ing, to cut easily through soft soil
(with verb si) *pukud-pukud(tan) the same of a continued action
pukuri (पुकुरि) a pond, a tank pal (पूल) a bridge, culvert
puli (पुलि) a small ornament, usually in the shape of a globe or an S, set in the nose of women.
puli (पुलि) arki arki (distilled liquor) made of madkam flower pulis (पुलिस) police
pulo, pulu (पुलो पुलु) used in prayers as poetic parallel of ba, 'a flower'
pulu (पुलू) a vegetable something like a small cucumber growing on a
Mil brug daug afised offiber
podo duki) pundi hasa - white clay *pundi juguni a servant spirit to rankani juguni and bir juguni
*pundi karuwa of the colour of chickens, white and dark grey intermingled
*pundi kirum a white animal whose blood (kirum) is shed in sacrfice
pundi ko: the Cattle Egret (also called pr ko:) pundi marchi a type of chilli
having a lighter (not fully white) colour *pundi mayom a white animal
whose blood is shed in sacrifice *pundi partu - white admixed with strains of another colour or colours
(partu not used alone) pundi-pundi completely white, thoroughly white
pundi ramba a cultivated pulse of the ramba type, has pods with
white seeds, Vigna catjang, Endl., Papilionaceae, H.53/50/3, B.53/115 pundi salukad a white coloured lotus, prob. esp. Nymphaen
esculenta, Roxb., Nymphaeceae,
H.7/1/2, B.7/2RAN
pungid (पुगि) an insect called the ant-lion which makes small
conical shaped pits in sand
puni (एम) disease of children, anemia, progressive emaciation punji (gf) wealth; to increase in wealth; of animals, etc., to increase
in number; the heaps of rice grains etc. put in the compartments (okowa) at a place of sacrifice by the diuri
*punji-nam to find (e.g. a proper
site for building a house) by burying a punji (e.g. some rice grains to see whether they will remain intact during the night)
punur (पुनुर ) a bush which has fresh offshoots (same as pudad.q.v.) punyal (पुयल) a kind of tall grass found on embankments during the monsoon, has prominent white
panicles, Saccharum spontaneum, L., Gramineae, B.139/37, H.139/ 54/1;verb, of rice grains, to grow straight and round with no devel-
opment of grains (gele) *punyal ba the white silver
narrow panicles of the punyal grass *punyal kumbada kumbad-type fish trap but made of punyal grass pupu: (पु) the part of the
abdomen between the navel and the genital organs plūpura: (पूपुर) many of each (distributive form of pura:)
pur (पुर) of a man, horse, bear, etc., to drivel or emit water from the mouth; of a horse, sheep, etc.
to emit water from the nose when
sneezing, etc.; water thus emitted *pur-lum to wet by emiting water on (as in pur)
pur(ken) (पुर)- the sound of a quail,
etc. suddenly flying off (e.g. when
297
surprised by a hunter)
pura (पुरा) to fulfill, observe fully; verbal affix. fully (Les. 27)
pura: (ge) much, many, very *pura:te usually, for the greater part
puru (gs) a common weed having clusters of small globose purple
flowers. Perhaps Sphaeranthus indicus, L., Compositae, B 78/41, H.78/13/1 (see also sowan puru)
purub (पुरु) East (from Hindi, better Ho would be singi tur, singi 0:1)
purui: (पुरुइ:) of soil, dry; to leave (or to be) scot-free from work purui:-bitnto roam about scot-
free from work (refl. form)
purur (पुर) to scratch the surface e.g. of the skin causing a wound; of a plough, to barely cut into hard earth
puruwa (पुड्या) a bundle (bigger than porom); to wrap in such a bundle
*puruwa-esed/kesed to block up in a bundle, e.g. the material in a birds nest (such as the nest of the tilad-tilad bird); the refl. is used of a silkworm enclosing itself inside a
leaf when starting to form a cocoon
pūruwa (पुड्या) first born (usually used of men, not animals. *püruwa lai: hon first born child
Puruwapai (पुरुवापाइ) Purnapani, a village about 10 mi. SW of Chaibasa
Purüya (पुया.) Purnea, a village about 8 mi. N. of Chaibasa
püs (पू.स) chandu: a month corresponding to late Dec. and early
Jan.
pus betaran the day of the mokor porob, q.v.

298
pusi (पुसि) a cat (used esp. when calling); sometimes used as poetic parallel with diku in prayers, etc.
pusi: (पुसि) to burst open a boil, soft fruit, etc. so that the soft matter comes out; pass. of a boil, etc., to burst open emitting soft matter.
Note the saying, lãi: pusi:tange: jomkeda, 'He ate so much that his stomach swelled up as though it would burst open'
pusta, pusuta (पुसता, पुसुता) the spotted deer
pusu-pusu(tan) (पुतु-पुसु) to drizzle (with verb gama, etc.) (also pisir pisir, pusur-pusur)
pusuri (पुसुरि) an infected pimple pusur-pusur (पुसुर-पुसुर) to drizzle
(see pusu-pusu(tan))
pusuta (पुतुला) see pusta
pusuțu (प्रसुद्ध) a very common bush, often serving as a hedge, having small white or purple coloured berries (also puțusu), Lantana camare, L., Verbenacene, Β.105/13, H.105/1/2
pilt, putu (पूट, पद) a hay stack; to make a hay stack; to stack hay
*ptiţu babasiń stacked straw (same as plūțuwakan babasiń)
*put(u)-rakab to put up in a hay stack (with babasiń, straw, as object)
puta: (ge) of water. to spring up from the ground (implies a stronger flow than seteń); of a wound, to resurface in another part of the body (e.g. of a boil); an additional entrance and exit to the burrows of mice, rats, etc. i.e, apart from the original hole which they made; this additional entrance is connected by tunnels to
the other entrance, used in terms chuțu puţa:, kateya puța:
*puţa: da: a spring
putab (पुटव) to put up (some matter for discussion)
putam (पुतम) a dove, a wild pigeon putam dumbi the Hoopoe bird, also called dochod dumbi
putam jarom ipilkiń two part
icular stars close to one another resembling two dove eggs in a nest.
They are fourth magnitude stars. near the first magnitude star Aldebaran, in constellation Taurus (see abarumtani: ipil)
puţări (पुटादि) proud, a show-off
putaw (भुटाव) of a bud of a flower, to open out; to open up an umbrella puti (पुति) a book
puți (gf) to cause to swell up in a round shape (e.g. as used in on- puţi, q.v.), pass. of the stomach, a football blatter, etc., to become swollen in a round shape
puți tayer a big variety of cucumber puți: (पुटि:) of water, to seep up
through e.g. the floor or a house
puți: (gfe:) to cut open the stomach of an animal and remove the intestines (the same could be used of cutting a man's stomach for a post morten)
puți:-era: the same as puți: putkid (पुटकिड़) see putukid
putu (5) to cover someone com- pletely with a long cloth (usually in
compound uyu-puţu); to sew with thread some roots into a small ball which is worn around the neck on a string, roots so made into a ball and worn around the neck
puțu danda: (पुटु दs) the pin in the centre of a yoke to which the
rope is fastened
putti (तु) to pierce through puţu (पू) a hay stack (see pttf)
puțubol (पुटुबौल) a football
puțui (पुटुs) to portion off into a small leaf or cloth bundle (potom)
(or into many bundles for
distribution some food (used esp. of meat gotten in a hunt, but can also
be used of rice) *puţui-ba/baga to portion off
shares (as given under puţui) putukid (पुटुफिङ) pustules on the body such as come up in smallpox (also putkid)
putukul (पुकुल ) of the ground, to
slightly break open as e.g. a mushroon begins to force its way above the surface
putuli: (पुतुति) a small clay pot slightly bigger than a matiya
puţuń (पुरुछ) the tusk of an elephant or of a wild boar; a protruding tooth of a man; to have
a tusk or tooth protruding *puţun daţa a protruding tooth
puțupuțiya (पुटपुटिया) a motor cycle
ra () to untie; to detach the feet
of a clinging animal from that to
which it is clinging, used in prayers as poetic parallel to hal, 'to pay up'
(e.g. to the spirits any offering due to them)
*ra-busar to loosen something tied tightly
*ra-mundu poetic parallel of hal- mundu, q.v.
*ra-nam to untie in order to get
(e.g. rice from a bandi)
*ra-0:1 to untie and take out ra: () to cry; to roar
*ra:-ader to wail someone in (to
induce someone to enter by wailing,
299
R
puttur (पुतूर ) - to foam at the mouth;
bubbling on the surface of boiling water; scum on top of stagnant water
puttura a mouth covered with froth
*puttur-era: to bubble or foam over
puţusu (पुटुलु) - same as pusuțu.q.v.
putuwa (दुवा) a big bundle, also puruwa, q.v.
*puțuwa kobi - cabbage, Brassica
oleracea, L. var. bullata, Cruciferae, B.10/2
puwa (पुवा) a very small poyla for measuring rice (Hindi paw. 250 gr.)
*puwa hon the same as puwa pūyal (पुयल) see punyal puyur (पुपुर) a place not reached
by rain (e.g under a tree); of a place, to be not wet by falling rain; to keep from getting wet by entering such a
place
used in connection with the keya- ader ceremony)
ra:-biyur to wander about crying (e.g. a witch)
ra:-geran crying and wailing, to cry and wail (a frequently used general term for crying)
*ra:-honor-same as ra:-onor, q.v. ra: itika another name for the maran itika, q.v. It is called ra: itika
since its sharp bristles cause even the animals to cry out
*ra:-iyam to wail loudly esp. on the occasion of a death (used in the
Sonua area) ra:-kusud to cry sobbing
